
=====PAGE 1=====
'•ON THE
MODE OF COMMUNICATION
CHOLERA.
JOHN SNOW, M.D.,
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, FELLOW OF THE
ROYAL MED. AND CHIR. SOCIETY, FELLOW AND VICE-
PRESIDENT OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY
OF LONDON,
&tctmfc35»ittcm,tmtrfjGBnlargrtu
I
t 7
1.121.Ck.^TlTlCTT
LONDON :
JOHN CHURCHILL, NEW BUELINOTON STREET.
M.DCCC.LV.
jr-'Wsr
=====PAGE 2=====
U'i;
\n-.ii ...—
LONDON I
T. RICHARDS. 87 ORKAT QUfcKN STREF:T.
=====PAGE 3=====
mm \
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
The firsteditionof thiswork, which was published
in August 1849, was only a slender pamphlet. I
have,sincethat time,writtenvariouspapers on the
same subject,which have been read at the Medical
Societies,and published in the medical journals.
The present editioncontains the substance of all
these articles,togetherwith much new matter,the
greater part of which is derived from my own
recent inquiries.
I take thisopportunity of expressing my thanks
to the Registrar-Generalfor the facilitiesafforded
me in making theseinquiries.
I feelevery confidence that my present labours
will receive the same kind considerationfrom the
Medical Profession which has been accorded to
my former endeavours to ascertainthe causes of
cholera.
SuckvilleStreet,Piccadilly,
11 December, 1854.
=====PAGE 4=====
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Outlineofthe historyofcholera .... 1
Casesprovingitscommunicationfrom persontoperson 3
Choleranot communicated by means ofeffluvia . . 9
The pathologyof choleraindicatesthe manner in which itis
communicated . . . . . .1.0
Analysisofthe bloodand evacuationsin cholera . 11 and 14
Cholera is propagated by the morbid poison enteringthe
alimentarycanal . . . . . .15
Evidenceof thismode ofcommunicationinthecrowded habi
tationsofthepoor , . . . .17
amongst themining population . . 19
Instancesof the communication of cholerathrough the
medium ofpollutedwater,in Horsleydown . . .23
at AlbionTerrace,Wandsworth Road . . 25
at Ilfordand near Bath . . .32
■at Newburn on the Tyne . . .33
at Cunnatore ..... 35
in the Black Sea Fleet . . . .36
in the neighbourhoodof Broad St.,Golden Sq. 38
at Hampstead West End (thewaterbeing car
riedfrom Broad Street) . . . .44
ExplanationoftheMap showingthe situationofthedeathsin
and around Broad Street,Golden Square . . 45
Tableofattacksand deathsnear Golden Square . . 49
Outbreakofcholeraat Deptfordcausedby pollutedwater . 55
Communication of choleraby means of the water of rivers
which receivethe contentsofthe sewers . . .56
Influenceof the water supply on the epidemicof 1832,in
London ....... 57
=====PAGE 5=====
CONTENTS.
PA OK
Table showing the mortalityfrom cholera,and the water supply 58
Influence of the water supply on the epidemic of 1849, in
London ....... 60
Table showing thisinfluence ..... 62
Communication of cholera by Thames water in the autumn
of 1848 . . . . ... .66
New water supply of the Lambeth Company . . .68
Effectof thisnew supply in the epidemic of autumn 1853 . 69
Tables showing thiseffect . . .71 and 73
Intimate mixture of the water supply of the Lambeth with
that of the Southwark and Vauxhall Company . . 74
Opportunity thus afforded of gaining conclusive evidence of
the effectof the water supply on the mortalityfrom cholera 75
Account of inquiry for obtaining thisevidence . . 77
Result of the inquiry as regards the firstfour weeks of the
epidemic of 1854 ....the firstseven weeks of the same epidemic 79
82
84,85Tables illustratingthese results
Inquiry of the Registrar-General respecting the effectof the
water supply of the above-mentioned Companies during
the laterperiod of the epidemic . . .87
Comparison of the mortalityof 1849 and 1854, in the districts
supplied by the above-named Companies . . 89
Effect of the water supply on the mortality from cholera
amongst the inmates of workhouses and prisons . 9 1
Cholera in the districtof the Chelsea Water Company . 93
Effectof dry weather to increasethe impurity of the Thames 95
Relation between the greater or less mortality from cholera
in London and the lessor greaterelevationof the ground 97
This relationshown to depend on the differenceof water supply
at differentelevations ..... ib.
Effectof water supply on the mortalityof cholerain Birming-
ester,etc. m
in Exeter 99
in Hull . . 100
in York . 101
in Dumfries, etc. 102
in Nottingham and Glasgow 103
in Paris and Newcastle upon Ty uo 1(14
=====PAGE 6=====
CONTENTS. Vll
PAGE
Limited inquiry respecting the effectof the water supply at
Newcastle . . . . . . .107
Assent of the medical professionto the influenceof polluted
water on the mortality from cholera . . . 109
True explanation of thisinfluence . . . .110
Answers to certainobjections . . . . .111
Circumstances connected with the historyof choleraexplained
by the principlesadvocated in thistreatise,as,—
The duration of the epidemic in each place usually
bearsa directrelationto the number of the population 115
The effectof season on the prevalence of cholera . 117
Proportion of the sexes who die of cholera at different
periods of an epidemic, and under differentcircum
stances . . . . . . .119
Proportion of deaths from cholera in certain occu
pations ...... 121
Evidence that plague, yellow fever, dysentery, and typhoid
feverare communicated in the same way as cholera . 125
Instancesin which ague was caused by impure water . 129
Measures required for the prevention of choleraand other dis
eases which are communicated in the same way . .133
Appendix, containing a listof the deaths from cholera which
were registeredin the four weeks ending 5th August
1854, together with the water supply of the houses in
which the fatalattacks took place,in allthe sub-districts
to which the supply of either the Southwark and Vaux-
hallor the Lambeth Water Company extends . . 138
=====PAGE 7=====
MAPS.
Map 1. Showing the deathsfrom cholerain Broad Street,Golden
Square,and the neighbourhood,from 19th August to 30th Septem
ber 1854. A black mark or bar for each death is placedin the
situationof the house in which the fatalattacktook place. The
situationof the Broad StreetPump isalsoindicated,as wellas that
ofallthe surroundingPumps towhich the publichad access.
Map 2. Showing the boundariesof the Registrar-General'sdis
trictson the southsideof the Thames in London,and alsothe water
supplyofthosedistricts.
=====PAGE 8=====
Pr".reri,>"he
Staatsbibliothek
MttNCHEN
MODE OF COMMUNICATION OF
CHOLERA.
The existenceof Asiatic Cholera cannot be distinctly
tracedback furtherthan the year 1769. Previous to that
time the greaterpart of India was unknown to European
medical men ; and this is probably the reason why the
historyof choleradoes not extend toa more remote period.
It has been proved by variousdocuments, quoted by Mr.
Scot,*that cholerawas prevalent at Madras in the year
above mentioned, and that itcarriedoffmany thousands
of persons in the peninsula of India from that time to
1790. From thisperiod we have very littleaccount of
the diseasetill1814, although,of course,itmight existin
many parts of Asia without coming under the noticeof
Europeans.
In June 1814, the choleraappeared with greatseverity
in the 1stbat.9th regt.N.I.,on itsmarch from Jaulnah
to Trichinopoly; while another battalion,which accom
panied it,did not suffer,although ithad been exposed to
exactlythe same circumstances,with one exception. Mr.
Cruikshanks,who attendedthe cases,made a report,which
willbe alludedto furtheron.
In 1817, the cholera prevailedwith unusual virulence
at severalplaces in the Delta of the Ganges ; and, as it
* Eeport on the Epidemic Cholera,1824,p. 5.
=====PAGE 9=====
2 ON THE MODE OF
had not been previouslyseen by the medical men practis
ing in that partof India,itwas thought by them to be a
new disease. At thistime the cholerabegan to spread to
an extentnot before known ; and, in the course of seven
years,it reached,eastward,to China and the Philippine
Islands; southward, to the Mauritius and Bourbon ; and
to the north-west,as far as Persia and Turkey. Its ap
proach towards our own country,afteritentered Europe,
was watched with more intenseanxietythan itsprogress
in otherdirections.It would occupy a long time to give
an account of the progressof choleraover differentparts
of the world, with the devastationithas caused in some
places,whilstithas passed lightlyover others,or leftthem
untouched ; and unlessthisaccountcould be accompanied
with a descriptionof the physicalconditionof the places,
and the habitsof the people,which I am unable to give,
itwould be of littleuse.
There are certaincircumstances,however, connected
with the progress of cholera,which may be statedin a
generalway. It travelsalong the greattracksof human
intercourse,never going fasterthan people travel,and
generally much more slowly. In extending to a fresh
islandor continent,it always appears firstat a sea-port.
It never attacksthe crews of ships going from a country
freefrom cholera,to one where the diseaseis prevailing,
tillthey have entereda port,or had intercoursewith the
shore. Itsexact progressfrom town totown cannotalways
be traced; but ithas never appeared except where there
has been ample opportunityforittobe conveyed by human
intercourse.
There are also innumerable instanceswhich prove the
communication of cholera,by individualcasesof the dis
ease,in the most convincingmanner. Instancessuch as
the followingseem freefrom every source of fallacy.
I calledlatelyto inquire respectingthe death of Mrs.
=====PAGE 10=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 3
Gore, thewifeofa labourer,from cholera,atNew Leigham
Road, Streatham. I found that a son of deceased had
been livingand working at Chelsea. He came home ill
with a bowel complaint,of which he died in a day or two.
His death took placeon August 18th. His mother, who
attendedon him, was taken illon the next day, and died
the day following(August 20th). There were no other
deathsfrom choleraregisteredin any of the metropolitan
districts,down to the 26th August, within two or three
miles of the above place; the nearestbeing at Brixton,
Norwood, or Lower Tooting.
The firstcase of decided Asiaticcholera in London, in
the autumn of 1848, was that of a seaman named John
Harnold, who had newly arrivedby theElbe steamerfrom
Hamburgh, where the diseasewas prevailing. He left
thevessel,and went to liveatNo. 8,New Lane, Gainsford
Street,Horsleydown. He was seizedwith choleraon the
22nd of September, and died in a few hours. Dr. Parkes,
who made an inquiryinto the earlycasesof cholera,on
behalfof the then Board of Health, consideredthisas the
firstundoubted caseof cholera.
Now the next caseof cholera,in London, occurred in
the very room in which the above patientdied. A man
named Blenkinsopp came to lodge in the same room. He
was attacked with cholera on the 30th September, and
was attendedby Mr. Russellof Thornton Street,Horsley
down, who had attended John Harnold. Mr. Russell
informed me that,in the caseof Blenkinsopp,therewere
rice-waterevacuations; and,amongst otherdecided symp
toms of cholera,complete suppressionof urine from Satur
day tillTuesday morning ; and afterthisthe patienthad
consecutivefever. Mr. Russell had seen a great deal of
cholerain 1832,and consideredthisa genuine caseof the
disease; and the historyof itleavesno room for doubt.
B 2
=====PAGE 11=====
4 ON THE MODE OF
The followinginstancesare quoted from an interesting
work by Dr. Simpson of York, entitled" Observationson
AsiaticCholera":— " The firstcasesin the seriesoccurred
at Moor Monkton, a healthy agriculturalvillage,situated
to the north-westof York, and distantsixmilesfrom that
place. At the time when the firstcaseoccurred,the ma
lady was not known to be prevailinganywhere in the
neighbourhood, nor, indeed, at any place within a dis
tance of thirtymiles.
" John Barnes, aged 39, an agriculturallabourer,
became severelyindisposed on the 28th of December
1832 ; he had been sufferingfrom diarrhoeaand cramps
fortwo days previously. He was visitedby Mr. George
Hopps, a respectablesurgeon at Redhouse, who, finding
him sinking into collapse,requested an interview with
his brother, Mr. J. Hopps, of York. This experienced
practitionerat once recognised the caseas one of Asiatic
cholera; and, having bestowed considerableattentionon
the investigationof thatdisease,immediatelyenquired for
some probable source of contagion,but in vain: no such
source could be discovered. When he repeatedhisvisit
on the day following,the patientwas dead; but Mrs.
Barnes (thewife),Matthew Metcalfe,and Benjamin Mus-
croft,two personswho had visitedBarnes on the preced
ing day, were alllabouring under the disease,but reco
vered. John Foster,Ann Dunn, and widow Creyke, all
of whom had communicated with the patients above
named, were attackedby premonitoryindisposition,which
was however arrested. Whilst the surgeons were vainly
endeavouring to discoverwhence the diseasecould pos
siblyhave arisen,the mystery was all at once, and most
unexpectedly,unravelledby the arrivalin the villageof
the son of the deceased John Barnes. This young man
was apprenticeto his uncle,a shoemaker, livingat Leeds.
=====PAGE 12=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 0
He informed the surgeons that his uncle's wife (his
father'ssister)had died of choleraa fortnightbeforethat
time, and that,as she had no children,her wearing ap
parel had been sent to Monkton by a common carrier.
The clotheshad not been washed ; Barnes had opened the
box in the evening ; on the next day he had fallensickof
the disease.
" During the illnessof Mrs. Barnes, her mother, who
was livingat Tockwith, a healthy villagefivemiles dis
tant from Moor Monkton, was requested to attend her.
She went to Monkton accordingly,remained with her
daughter fortwo days,washed her daughter'slinen,and
set out on her return home, apparentlyin good health.
Whilst in the actof walking home she was seizedwith the
malady, and felldown in collapseon the road. She was
conveyed home to her cottage,and placed by the sideof
her bedridden husband. He, and alsothe daughter who
residedwith them, took the malady. All the threedied
within two days. Only one other case occurred in the
villageof Tockwith, and itwas not a fatalcase."(p.136.)
" A man came from Hull (where cholerawas prevail
ing),by tradea painter; his name and age are unknown.
He lodged atthehouse of Samuel Wride, at Pocklington;
was attackedon his arrivalon the 8th of September, and
died on the 9th. Samuel Wride himselfwas attackedon
the 11th of September, and died shortlyafterwards.These
comprise the firstcases.
" The next was thatof a person named Kneeshaw, who
had been at Wride's house. But as thisforms one of a
seriesconnected with the former,furnished by Dr. Lay-
cock,who has very obliginglytaken the troubleto verify
the datesand factsof the latterpart of the series,itwill
be bestto give thenotesof thesecasesin thatgentleman's
own words.
=====PAGE 13=====
6 ON THE MODE OF
" 'My dearDr. Simpson,— Mrs. Kneeshaw was attacked
with cholera on Monday, September 9th, and her son
William on the 10th. He died on Saturday the 15th;
she lived three weeks; they lived at Pocklington. On
Sunday, September 16th, Mr. and Mrs. Flint,and Mr.
and Mrs. Giles Kneeshaw, and two children,went to
Pocklington to see Mrs. Kneeshaw. Mrs. Flintwas her
daughter. They allreturned the same day, except Mr.
M. G. Kneeshaw, who stayedat Pocklington,untilMon
day, September 24th, when he returned to York. At
three o'clockon the same day, he was attackedwith cho
lera,and died Tuesday, September 25th, at threeo'clock
in the morning. [There had been no cholerain York for
some time.] On Thursday, September 27th, Mrs. Flint
was attacked,but recovered. On Saturday, September
29th, her sister,Mrs. Stead, came from Pocklington to
York, to attendupon her ; was attackedon Monday, Oc
toberthe 1st,and died Qctober the 6th.
" 'Mrs. Hardcastle,of No. 10, Lord Mayor's Walk,
York, was attackedwith choleraon October 3rd, and died
the same day. Miss Agar, residingwith her, died of
choleraon October 7th. Miss Robinson, who had come
from Hull to take care of the house, afterthe death of
Mrs. Hardcastle and Miss Agar, was attacked,and died
on October 11th. Mr. C. Agar, of Stonegate,York, went
to see Mrs. Hardcastleon October 3rd, was attackednext
day, and died October 6th, early in the morning. On
Monday, October 8th, Mrs. Agar, the mother of Mr. C.
Agar, was attacked,and on the same day, one of the ser
vants; both recovered. They had livedwith Mr. Agar.
All the above datesand factsI have verified.
" 'I am, dear Dr. Simpson, yours very truly,
" *T. Laycock.
" «Lendal, December 1st,1849.'" (p. 160.)
=====PAGE 14=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. I
Severalotherinstancesof thecommunication ofcholera,
quiteas strikingasthe above, are relatedinDr. Simpson's
work.
The followingaccount of the propagationofcholerahas
been published,along with severalother historiesof the
same kind,in a pamphlet by Dr. Bryson*
" Mr. Greene, of Fraserburgh, gives the followingac
count of the introductionof cholerainto two villagesin
Scotland. Two boats,one belonging to Cairnbulgh and
the other to Inveralochy, met at Montrose, and their
crews on severaloccasionsstrolledthrough the town in
company, although aware thatitwas at thattime infected
with cholera. On their passage homeward, they were
obliged to put into Gourdon, where one man belonging
to the Cairnbulgh boat died on the 22nd of September,
afteran illnessof fourteenhours,with allthe symptoms of
cholera. Several of the men of both boats were at the
same time attackedwith serousdiarrhoea,of which three
of them had not recoveredwhen they reached theirre
spectivehomes; nor indeed untilthe firstcases of the
epidemic broke out in the villages.
" In Inveralochythe firstcaseappeared on the 28th of
September, three or four days afterthe arrivalof the
boat; the sufferer,the father of one of the crew, had
been engaged in removing the cargo along with other
members of hisfamily. Two other casesoccurred in this
family; one on the 30th of September, and one on the
1stof October.
" In Cairnbulgh, the firstcasesappeared on the 29th
and 30th of September respectively,and both patientshad
also been engaged in removing the cargo of the boat
(shell-fish)belonging to that village. No other cases
appeared untilthe 3rd of October ; so thatfrom the 28th
* On the InfectiousOriginand Propagationof Cholera.
=====PAGE 15=====
8 ON THE MODE OF
of September to the 3rd of October none were attackedin
eithervillage,but thosewho had come in contactwith the
suspectedboats,or theircrews.
" The subsequent caseswere chieflyamong relativesof
those firstattacked; and the order of their propagation
was as follows. In Inveralochy,the firstcase was the
fatherof a family; the second, his wife; the third,a
daughter livingwith her parents; the fourth,a daughter
who was married and lived in a differenthouse,but who
attendedher fatherand mother during theirillness; the
fifth,the husband of the latter; and the sixth,hismother.
Other casesoccurred at the same time,althoughtheywere
not known to have communicated with the former. One
of them was the fatherof a family; the second his son,
who was seizedthe day afterhis father,and a daughter
the next day."
The followinginstancesof communication of cholera
are taken from amongst many othersin the " Report on
Epidemic Cholera to the Royal College of Physicians",
by Dr. Baly.
" Stockport. (Dr. Rayner and Mr. J. Rayner, report
ers). Sarah Dixon went to Liverpool,September 1st,to
bury her sister,who had died of cholerathere; returned
to Stockporton September 3rd; was attackedwith cholera
on the 4th ; was taken home by her mother toher mother's
house, a quarter of a mile distant; was in collapse,but
recovered. Her mother was attacked on the 11th, and
died. The brother,James Dixon, came from High Water
to seehismother, and was attackedon the 14th.
" Liverpool. (Mr. Henry Taylor,reporter.) A nurse
attended a patientin Great Howard Street(atthe lower
part of the town), and on her return home, near Everton
(thehigher part of the town),was seized,and died. The
nurse who attended her was ah,o seized,and died. No
=====PAGE 16=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. i)
other case had occurred previouslyin that neighbour
hood, and none followedfor about a fortnight.
" Hedon. (Dr. Sandwith, reporter.) Mrs. N. went
from Paul, a villagecloseto the Humber, to Hedon, two
miles off,to nurse her brother in cholera; the next day,
afterhis death,went to nurse Mrs. B., also at Hedon ;
within two days was attackedherself;was removed to a
lodging-house; the son of the lodging-house keeper was
attackedthe next day, and died. Mrs. N.'s son removed
her back to Paul; was himself attacked two days after
wards, and died."
It would be easy,by going through the medical jour
nalsand works which have been published on cholera,to
quote as many casessimilarto the above as would filla
large volume. But the above instancesare quite suffi
cientto show thatcholeracan be communicated from the
sickto the healthy; forit isquiteimpossiblethateven a
tenth part of thesecasesof consecutiveillnesscould have
followed each other by mere coincidence,without being
connected as cause and effect.
Besides the factsabove mentioned, which prove that
choleraiscommunicated from person to person,thereare
otherswhich show, first,that being present in the same
room with a patient,and attendingon him, do not neces
sarilyexpose a person to the morbid poison; and, se
condly,thatitisnot always requisitethata person should
be very near a cholerapatientin order to take the dis
ease,as the morbid matter producing it may be trans
mitted to a distance. It used to be generallyassumed,
that if cholerawere a catchingor communicable disease,
itmust spread by effluviagiven offfrom the patientinto
the surrounding air,and inhaledby othersintothe lungs.
This assumption led to very conflictingopinionsrespect
ing the disease. A littlereflectionshews, however, that
=====PAGE 17=====
10 ON THE MODE OF
we have no right thus to limitthe way in which a dis
easemay be propagated,forthe communicable diseasesof
which we have a correctknowledge spread in very dif
ferentmanners. The itch,and certainother diseasesof
the skin,are propagated in one way ; syphilis,in another
way ; and intestinalworms in a thirdway, quite distinct
from eitherof the others.
A considerationof the pathology of choleraiscapable
of indicatingto us the manner in which the diseaseis
communicated. If it were ushered in by fever,or any
other general constitutionaldisorder,then we should be
furnishedwith no clue to the way in which the morbid
poison entersthe system ; whether, for instance,by the
alimentarycanal,by the lungs",or in some othermanner,
but should be leftto determine this point by circum
stancesunconnected with the pathology of the disease.
But from allthat I have been able to learn of cholera,
both from my own observationsand the descriptionsof
others,I conclude thatcholerainvariablycommences with
the affectionof the alimentarycanal. The diseaseoften
proceeds with so littlefeelingof general illness,that the
patientdoes not considerhimselfin danger,or even apply
for advice,tillthe malady is far advanced. In a few
cases,indeed,there are dizziness,faintness,and a feeling
of sinking,before dischargesfrom the stomach or bowels
actuallytake place; but therecan be no doubt thatthese
symptoms depend on the exudation from the mucous
membrane, which issoon afterwardscopiouslyevacuated.
This isonly what occurs in certaincasesof haemorrhage
intothe alimentarycanal,where allthe symptoms of loss
of blood are present before that fluidshows itselfin the
evacuations.In thoserarecases,called" cholerasicca,"in
which no purging takes place,the intestineshave been
found distendedwith the excretionpeculiarto the dis
=====PAGE 18=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 11
ease,whenever an examination of the hody has taken
place afterdeath. In allthe casesof cholerathatI have
attended,the lossof fluidfrom the stomach and bowels
has been sufficientto account for the collapse,when the
previousconditionof the patientwas taken intoaccount,
togetherwith the suddenness of the loss,and the circum
stance that the processof absorptionappears to be sus
pended.
The symptoms which followthe affectionof the aliment
ary canalin choleraare exactlythosewhich thisaffection
isadequate,and, indeed,could not failto produce. The
analyseswhich have been made of the blood of cholera
patients,show thatthe watery fluideffusedintothestomach
and bowels is not replacedby absorption,or is replaced
only to a smallextent. The analysesof Dr. O'Shaugh-
nessy and others,during the cholera of 1831-32, show
that the amount of water in the blood was very much
diminished in proportion to the solidconstituents,and
that the saltsof the blood were also diminished. The
analysesof Dr. Garrod and Dr. Parkes, in the spring
of 1849, were more numerous and exact.* The amount
of water in the blood of healthy personsison the average
785 partsin 1000 ; whereas,in the average of the analyses
performed by Drs. Garrod and Parkes, it was only 733
parts,while the amount of solidconstituentsof the blood,
relativelyto the water, was increased from 215 — the
healthy standard— to 267. The globules,together with
the albumen and otherorganic constituentsof the serum,
amount in the healthystateto 208 partsin 1000,while in
the blood of cholerapatientsthey amounted to 256 parts.
The salineconstituentsin 1000 parts of blood are some
what increased,on account of the great diminution of
water ; but, when estimatedin relationto the othersolid
* See "London Journalof Medicine,"May, 1849.
=====PAGE 19=====
12 ON THE MODE OF
ingredients,or tothe whole quantityexistingin thehealthy
body, the amount isdiminished. Dr. Garrod isof opinion
that a chemical analysiswill determine whether or not a
specimen of blood has been derived from a cholerapatient.
The stoolsand vomited matters in cholera consistof
water, containing a small quantity of the saltsof the
blood, and a very littlealbuminous substance. The
change in the blood is preciselythatwhich the lossby
the alimentarycanalought to produce ; and, indeed,it is
physicallyimpossiblethatthe alterationin the blood can
be caused in any otherway. The sweating which takes
place in an advanced stageof the diseasemay increasethe
densityof the blood to a triflingextent; but it does not
come on tillthe blood isalreadyaltered,and it is only a
consequence of the diminished force of the circulation,
likethe sweating met with in collapsefrom haemorrhage
or severeinjuries,and in faintnessfrom venesection.
The lossof water from the blood causes it to assume
the thicktarryappearance,so well known to allwho have
opened a vein in cholera. The diminishedvolume of the
blood causesmany of the symptoms of a truehaemorrhage,
as debility,faintness,and coldness; while theseeffectsare
much increasedby itsthickand tenaciouscondition,which
impedes itspassage through the pulmonary capillaries,
thereby reducing the contentsof the arteriesthroughout
the system to the smallestpossibleamount, as indicated
by the small thready pulse. The interruptionto the
pulmonary circulationoccasionedby the want of fluidity
of the blood,isthe causeof the distressingfeelingof want
of breath. Proofs of the obstructedcirculationthrough
the lungs generallyremain afterdeath,in the distended
stateof the pulmonary arteriesand right cavitiesof the
heart. The deficientsupply of blood to the various
organs,and itsunfitnessto pass through the capillaries,
=====PAGE 20=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 13
are the cause of the suppressionof the renal,biliary,and
other secretions.The cramps appear to consistchiefly
of reflexaction,caused by the irritation,and probably
the distension,of the bowels.
If any further proof were wanting than those above
stated,that allthe symptoms attending cholera,except
thoseconnected with the alimentarycanal,depend simply
on the physicalalterationof the blood,and not on any
cholerapoison circulatingin the system,itwould only be
necessaryto alludeto the effectsof a weak salinesolution
injected into the veins in the stage of collapse. The
shrunken skin becomes filledout,and losesitscoldness
and lividity; the countenance assumes a natural aspect;
the patientis able to situp, and for a time seems well.
If the symptoms were caused by a poison circulatingin
the blood, and depressing the action of the heart,it is
impossiblethatthey should thus be suspended by an in
jectionof warm water,holding a littlecarbonate of soda
in solution.
It has oftenbeen contended thatthe collapseof cholera
cannot be the mere resultof the purging and vomiting,
because,in some of the most rapid and malignant cases,
the amount of the stoolsand vomited fluidislessthan in
milder and more protractedones,or even in some casesin
which the patientsrecover. But, in the most rapid and
malignant cases,thereissufficientlossof aqueous fluidby
the alimentary canal to alterthe blood into the thick
tenaciousstatepeculiarto this disease; and the fact of
more purging occurring in other caseswhich are more
protracted,only proves that,in these latter,absorption
from the stomach and intestineshas not been altogether
arrested,or thatthe stoolshave been dilutedwith fluids
drank by the patient. The lossof fluidin every caseof
fullydeveloped cholera must be sufficientto cause the
=====PAGE 21=====
14 ON THE MODE OF
thickened stateof the blood,which is the cause of the
algide symptoms ; and the amount of malignancy of the
case must depend chieflyon the extenttowhich the func
tionof absorptionisimpaired.
If absorptionwere altogetherarrestedin every caseof
cholerafrom the beginning,the amount of dischargefrom
the alimentarycanalwould not equalthatof a fatalhaemor
rhage,forthe thickened blood which remains iscertainly
not able to maintain lifeso well as the same quantityof
healthyblood. Indeed, it iseasy to calculatethe amount
of fluidseparatedfrom the blood, by means of the ana
lysespreviouslyquoted,and otherswhich have been made
of the cholerastools. In some analysesof these evacua
tionsmade by Dr. Parkes,* the average composition in
1,000 partswas found to be 982.4 water and 17.6 solids;
consequently,the problem ismerely to findhow much of
such a fluidrequiresto be subtractedfrom blood consist
ing of water 785 and solids215, in 1000 parts,in order
to reduce it to blood consistingof water 733 and solids
267. The answer to this problem is that 208.5 parts
would require to be subtractedfrom 1000 partsof blood.
M. Valentin has estimatedthe averageamount of blood in
the human adult at thirtypounds; and, therefore,the
whole quantityof fluidthatrequiresto be effusedintothe
stomach and bowels, in order to reduce the blood of a
healthy adult individualto the conditionin which it is
met with in the collapseof cholerais,on the average,100
ounces, or fiveimperialpints. This calculationmay be
usefulas indicatingthe amount of fluidwhich ought not
to be exceeded in the injectionof the blood vessels.
Diseaseswhich arecommunicated from person toperson
are caused by some materialwhich passesfrom the sickto
* London Journalof Medicine,loe.cit.
=====PAGE 22=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 15
the healthy,and which has the propertyof increasingand
multiplyingin the systems of the persons it attacks. In
syphilis,small-pox,and vaccinia,we have physicalproof
of the increaseof the morbid material,and in other com
municable diseasesthe evidence of thisincrease,derived
from the factof theirextension,isequallyconclusive.As
cholera commences with an affectionof the alimentary
canal,and as we have seen thatthe blood isnot under the
influenceof any poison in the earlystagesof thisdisease,*
itfollowsthatthemorbid materialproducing choleramust
be introducedintothe alimentarycanal— must, in fact,be
swallowed accidentally,forpersonswould not take it in
tentionally; and the increaseof the morbid material,or
cholerapoison,must take placein the interiorof the sto
mach and bowels. It would seem thatthe cholerapoison,
when reproduced in sufficientquantity,actsas an irritant
on the surfaceof the stomach and intestines,or, what is
stillmore probable,itwithdraws fluidfrom the blood cir
culatingin the capillaries,by a power analogous to that
by which the epithelialcellsof the variousorgans abstract
the differentsecretionsin the healthy body. For the
morbid matter of cholera having the propertyof repro
ducing itsown kind, must necessarilyhave some sort of
structure,most likelythatof a cell. It isno objectionto
thisview that the structureof the cholerapoison cannot
be recognisedby the microscope,for the matter of small
pox and of chancrecan only be recognisedby theireffects,
and not by theirphysicalproperties.
The period which intervenesbetween the time when a
morbid poison entersthe system,and the commencement
of the illnesswhich follows,iscalledthe period of incuba
tion. It is,in reality,a period of reproduction,as regards
* In the so-calledsecondaryfeverthere is toxicohsemia,arisingfrom
suppressedexcretionby the kidneys.
=====PAGE 23=====
16 ON THE MODE OF
the morbid matter; and the diseaseisdue to the crop or
progeny resultingfrom the smallquantityof poisonfirst
introduced. In cholera,thisperiodof incubationor repro
duction is much shorterthan in most otherepidemic or
communicable diseases. From the cases previouslyde
tailed,itis shown to be in generalonly from twenty-four
to forty-eighthours. It isowing to thisshortnessof the
period of incubation,and to the quantityof the morbid
poison thrown ofFin the evacuations,that cholerasome
timesspreadswith a rapidityunknown in other diseases.
The mode of communication of cholera might have
been the same as itis,even ifithad been a diseaseof the
blood ; for there isa good deal of evidenceto show that
plague,typhoid fever,and yellow fever,diseasesin which
the blood is affected,are propagated in the same way as
cholera. There is sufficientevidence also,I believe,in
the followingpages,to prove the mode of communication
of cholerahere explained,independentlyof the pathology
of the disease; but itwas from considerationsof itspatho
logy thatthe mode of communication was firstexplained,
and, if the views here propounded are correct,we had a
knowledge of cholera,beforeithad been twenty yearsin
Europe, more correctthan thatof most of the olderepi
demics ; a knowledge which, indeed,promises to throw
much lighton the mode of propagation of many diseases
which have beeYipresenthere forcenturies.
The instancesin which minute quantitiesof the ejec
tionsand dejectionsof cholerapatientsmust be swallowed
are sufficientlynumerous to account forthe spread of the
disease; and on examination itis found to spread most
where the facilitiesfor thismode of communication are
greatest.Nothing has been found to favourthe extension
of choleramore than want of personal cleanliness,whe
ther arisingfrom habit or scarcityof water,although the
=====PAGE 24=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 17
circumstancetilllatelyremained unexplained. The bed
linen nearly always becomes wetted by the cholera eva
cuations,and as theseare devoid of the usual colourand
odour,the hands of personswaitingon the patientbecome
soiledwithout theirknowing it; and unlessthesepersons
are scrupulouslycleanlyin theirhabits,and wash their
hands beforetakingfood,they must accidentallyswallow
some of the excretion,and leave some on the food they
handle or prepare,which has to be eaten by the restof
the family,who, amongst the working classes,oftenhave
to take theirmeals in the sickroom : hence the thousands
of instancesin which, amongst thisclassof the population,
a caseof cholerain one member of the familyisfollowed
by other cases; whilst medical men and others,who
merely visitthe patients,generally escape. The post
mortem inspectionof the bodies of cholera patientshas
hardly ever been followedby the diseasethatI am aware,
thisbeing a duty that is necessarilyfollowed by careful
washing of the hands ; and it isnot the habitof medical
men to be taking food on such an occasion. On the other
hand, the dutiesperformed about the body, such as laying
it out, when done by women of the working class,who
make the occasionone of eating and drinking,are often
followedby an attackof cholera; and personswho merely
attendthe funeral,and have no connexion with the body,
frequentlycontractthe disease,in consequence, appa
rently,of partaking of food which has been prepared or
handled by thosehaving dutiesabout the cholerapatient,
or hislinenand bedding.
Deficiencyof lightisa great obstacleto cleanliness,as
it prevents dirtfrom being seen, and it must aid very
much the contamination of the food with the cholera
evacuations. Now the want of light,in some of the
dwellingsof the poor,in large towns, is one of the cir-
c
=====PAGE 25=====
18 PREVALENCE OF CHOLERA
cumstances that has often been commented on as increas
ing the prevalence of cholera.
The involuntary passage of the evacuations in most had
cases of cholera, must also aid in spreading the disease.
Mr. Baker, of Staines, who attended two hundred and
sixty cases of cholera and diarrhoea in 1849, chieflyamong
the poor, informed me, in a letterwith which he favoured
me in December of that year, that " when the patients
passed their stools involuntarily the disease evidently
spread." It is amongst the poor, where 'awhole family
live, sleep, cook, eat, and wash in a single room, that
cholera has been found to spread when once introduced,
and stillmore in those places termed common lodging-
houses, in which several families were crowded into
a single room. It was amongst the vagrant class,who
lived in this crowded state,that cholera was most fatalin
1832; but the Act of Parliament for the regulation of
common lodging-houses, has caused the diseaseto be much .
less fatal amongst these people in the late epidemics.
When, on the other hand, cholera is introduced into the
better kind of houses, as it often is, by means that will
be afterwards pointed out, it hardly ever spreads from
one member of the family to another. The constant use
of the hand-basin and towel, and the fact of the apart
ments for cooking and eating being distinctfrom the sick
room, are the cause of this.
The great prevalence of cholera in institutionsfor pau
per children and pauper lunatics,whenever ithas gained
access to these buildings, meets with a satisfactoryexpla
nation according to the principles here laid down. In
the asylum for pauper children at Tooting, one hundred
and forty deaths from cholera occurred amongst a thou
sand inmates, and the disease did not cease tillthe re
maining children had been removed. The children were
=====PAGE 26=====
IN THE MINING DISTRICTS. 19
placed two or threein a bed,and vomited over each,other
when they had the cholera. Under these circumstances,
and when it isremembered thatchildren get theirhands
into everything,and are constantlyputting theirfingers
in theirmonths, itisnot surprisingthatthe malady spread
in thismanner, although I believeas much attentionwas
paid to cleanlinessas is possiblein a building crowded
with children. Pauper lunaticsare generallya good deal
crowded together,especiallyin theirsleepingwards, and
as the greaternumber of them are in a stateof imbecility,
they are no more carefulthan childrenin the use of their
hands. It iswith the greatestdifficultythat they can be
kept even moderately clean. As might be expected,ac
cording to the views here explained,the lunaticpatients
generallysufferedin a much greaterproportionthan the
keepers and otherattendants.
The mining populationof Great Britainhave suffered
more from cholerathan persons in any otheroccupation,
— a circumstancewhich I believecan only be explained
by the mode of communication of the malady above
pointed out. Pitmen are differentlysituatedfrom every
other classof workmen in many important particulars.
There are no priviesin the coal-pits,or,as I believe,in
other mines. The workmen stay so long in the mines
that they are obliged to take a supply of food with them,
which they eatinvariablywith unwashed hands,and with
out knifeand fork. The followingisa reply which I re
ceived from a relativeof mine connected with a colliery
near Leeds, in answer to an inquiry I made :—
" Our colliersdescend at fiveo'clockin the morning, to
be ready forwork at six,and leave the pit from one to
half-pastthree. The averagetime spentin the pitiseight
to nine hours. The pitmen alltake down with them a
supply of food,which consistsof cake,with the addition,
c2
=====PAGE 27=====
20 ON THE MODE OF
in some cases,of meat ; and allhave a bottle,containing
about a quart of 'drink'. I fear that our colliersare no
betterthan othersas regards cleanliness.The pit isone
huge privy,and of course the men always take theirvic
tualswith unwashed hands."
It isvery evidentthat,when a pitman isattackedwith
cholerawhilstatwork, the diseasehas facilitiesforspread
ing among hisfellow-labourerssuch as occur in no other
occupation.That themen are occasionallyattackedwhilst
at work I know, from having seen them brought up from
some of the coal-pitsin Northumberland, in the winter
of 1831-2,afterhaving had profuse dischargesfrom the
stomach and bowels,and when fastapproaching to a state
of collapse.
Dr. Baly,who has done me the honour of giving a very
fulland impartialaccount of my views in his " Eeport on
Cholera to the College of Physicians",makes the objec
tiontowhat I have saidabout the colliers,thatthe women
and childrenwho do not work in the mines,were attacked
in as largenumbers as the men. I believe,however, that
thisisonly what ought to occur from the propagationof
the cholerain the crowded dwellingsof the pitmen,in the
manner previouslyexplained. The only effectof itscom
munication in the pitswould be, that the men and boys
in a familywould have the cholera a day or two earlier
than the women and children; and if a specialinquiry
were made on thispoint,thiswould probably be found
to be the case. It has often been said that,if cholera
were a communicable disease,women ought to sufferin
much greaternumbers than the men, as they areemployed
in nursing the sick. I leavethisobjectionand Dr. Baly's
to combat each other.
It isvery probable that,when choleraoccurs amongst
people who are employed in the preparationor vending
=====PAGE 28=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOI-ERA. 21
of provisions,the diseasemay be spread by thismeans,
although from the nature of the subjectitishardly to be
expected thatthe factwould be discovered. The follow
ing cases,perhaps,affordas decisiveproof of thisvariety
of communication of choleraas can be expected. In the
beginning of 1850, a letterappeared in the Provincial
Medical and SurgicalJournal,from Mr. John C. Bloxam,
in the Isleof Wight, being an answer to the inquiry on
choleraby Mr. Hunt. Among otherinterestinginforma
tion,Mr. Bloxam stated,that the only cases of cholera
that occurred in the villageof Carisbrook,happened in
personswho ate of some stalecow-heels,which had been
the property of a man who died in Newport, aftera short
and violentattackof cholera. Mr. Bloxam kindly made
additionalpersonalinquiriesintothe case,in consequence
of questionsI put to him, and the followingisa summary
of the informationcontainedin his letter:—
The man from whose house the cow-heelswere sentfor
saledied on Monday, the 20th of August. It was the
custom in the house to boil these articleson Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday ; and the cow-heels under con
siderationwere taken to Carisbrook,which isa mile from
Newport, ready boiled, on Tuesday the 21st. Eleven
persons in allpartook of thisfood,seven of whom ate it
without any additionalcooking. Six of thesewere taken
illwithin twenty-fourhours aftereatingit,fiveof whom
died,and one recovered. The seventhindividual,a child,
who atebut a small quantityof the cow-heels,was unaf
fectedby it. Four personspartook of the food afteraddi
tionalcooking. In one casethe cow-heelswere fried,and
the person who ate them was taken illof cholerawithin
twenty-fourhours afterwards,and died. Some of the food
was made intobroth,ofwhich threepersonspartookwhile
itwas warm; two of them remained well,but the third
=====PAGE 29=====
22 COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA
person partook again of the broth next day, when cold,
and, within twenty-fourhours afterthislattermeal, she
was taken illwith cholera,of which she died. It may be
proper to mention, although itisno unusual circumstance
for animal food to be eatenin hot weather when not quite
fresh,thatsome of the personsperceivedthe cow-heelsto
be not so fresh as they ought to have been at the time
they were eaten,and partof them had to be thrown away
a day or two afterwards,in consequence of being quite
putrid.
It is not unlikelythat some of the cases of cholera
which spring up without any apparent connection with
previous cases,may be communicated through articlesof
diet. It is the practiceof the poor people,who gain a
livingby sellingfruitand other articlesin the streets,to
keep theirstockin the very crowded rooms inwhich they
live,and, when visitingthe out-patientsof a medical cha
ritya few years ago, I oftensaw basketsof fruitpushed
under the beds of sick patients,in closeproximity with
the chamber utensils.I need hardly say thatifcasesof
diseasewere propagated in thisway, itwould be quite
impossibleto tracethem.
If the cholera had no other means of communication
than thosewhich we have been considering,it would be
constrainedto confineitselfchieflyto the crowded dwel
lingsof the poor, and would be continuallyliableto die
out accidentallyin a place,forwant of the opportunityto
reach fresh victims; but there is oftena way open forit
to extend itselfmore widely,and to reach the well-to-do
classesof the community ; I allude to the mixture of the
choleraevacuationswith the water used for drinking and
=====PAGE 30=====
BY POLLUTED WATEK. Zo
culinarypurposes,eitherby permeating the ground, and
getting into wells, or by running along channels and
sewers into the riversfrom which entiretowns are some
times suppliedwith water.
In 1849 there were in Thomas Street,Horsleydown,
two courtsclosetogether,consistingof a number of small
houses or cottages,inhabitedby poor people. The houses
occupied one sideof each courtor alley— the southsideof
Trusscott'sCourt, and the north sideof the other,which
was calledSurrey Buildings,being placed back to back,
with an interveningspace,divided intosmall back areas,
in which were situatedthe priviesof both the courts,
communicating with the same drain,and there was an
open sewer which passed the furtherend of both courts.
Now, in Surrey Buildings the cholera committed fearful
devastation,whilst in the adjoiningcourt there was but
one fatalcase,and another case that ended in recovery.
In the former court,theslopsof dirtywater,poured down
by the inhabitantsinto a channel in frontof the houses,
got into the well from which they obtainedtheirwater ;
thisbeing the only differencethat Mr. Grant, the As
sistant-Surveyorforthe Commissioners of Sewers, could
find between the circumstancesof the two courts,as he
statedin a report that he made to the Commissioners.
The well in questionwas supplied from the pipes of the
Southwark and Vauxhall Waterworks, and was covered
in on a levelwith the adjoiningground ; and the inha
bitantsobtained the water by a pump placed over the
well. The channel mentioned above commenced closeby
the pump. Owing to something being out of order,the
water had forsome time occasionallyburstout at the top
of the well,and overflowed into the gutter or channel,
afterwardsflowingback again mixed with the impurities;
and creviceswere leftin the ground or pavement, allow
=====PAGE 31=====
24 COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA
ing part of the contentsof the gutterto flow at alltimes
intothe well; and when itwas afterwardsemptied,a large
quantityof black and highly offensivedepositwas found.
The firstcaseof cholerain thiscourtoccurred on July
20th,in a littlegirl,who had been labouringunder diar
rhoeaforfour days. This caseended favourably. On the
21stJuly, the next day, an elderlyfemale was attacked
with the disease,and was in a stateof collapseat ten
o'clockthe same night. This patientpartiallyrecovered,
but died of some consecutiveaffectionon August 1. Mr.
Vinen, of Tooley Street,who attendedthese cases,states
thatthe evacuationswere passed into the beds, and that
the water in which the foul linenwas washed would in
evitablybe emptied into the channel mentioned above.
Mr. Russell,of Thornton Street,Horsleydown, who at
tended many of the subsequent cases in the court,and
who, along with another medical gentleman,was the first
to callthe attentionof the authoritiesto the stateof the
well,says that such water was invariablyemptied there,
and the people admit the circumstance. About a week
afterthe above two casescommenced, a number ofpatients
were taken illnearly together: four on Saturday, July
28th,seven or eighton the 29th,and severalon the day
following. The deathsin the casesthat were fataltook
place as follows:— one on the 29th,four on the 30th,and
one on the 31st July ; two on August 1st,and one on
August the 2nd, 5th,and 10th respectively,making eleven
in all. They occurred in seven out of the fourteensmall
houses situatedin the court.
The two firstcaseson the 20th and 21stwere probably
caused by the choleraevacuationscontainedin theThames
water,as itcame from the waterworks, and they may be
consideredto representabout the averageamount of cases
fortheneighbourhood,therehaving been justthatnumber
=====PAGE 32=====
BY POLLUTED WATER. 25
in the adjoiningcourt,about the same time. But in a few
days, when the dejectionsof these patientsmust have
become mixed with the water the peopledrank, a number
of additionalcasescommenced nearly together. The pa
tientswere allwomen and children,the men livingin the
courtnot having been attacked; they may have been out
at work allday and not have drank the water,but as the
survivinginhabitantsnearly allleftthe placeimmediately
afterthe above mortalityoccurred,I was not ableto ascer
tainwhether thiswas so or not.
In Albion Terrace,Wandsworth Road, there was an
extraordinarymortalityfrom cholera in 1849, which was
the more strikingas therewere no other casesat the time
in the immediate neighbourhood ; the houses oppositeto,
behind,and in the same line,ateach end of thoseinwhich
the diseaseprevailed,having been freefrom it. The row
of houses in which the choleraprevailedto an extentpro
bably at that time quite unprecedented in thiscountry,
constitutedthe genteelsuburban dwellingsof a number of
professionaland tradespeople,and are most of them de
tached a few feetfrom each other. They were supplied
with water on the same plan. In thisinstancethe water
got contaminated by the contentsof the house drainsand
cesspools. The choleraextended to nearly allthe houses
in which the water was thus tainted,and to no others.
These houses were numbered from 1 to 17, in Albion
Terrace, and were supplied with water from a copious
spring in the road in front of the terrace,the water of
which was conducted, by a brick barrel-drainbetween
Nos. 7 and 8, to the back of the houses,and then flowed
rightand left,to supply tanksin the ground behind each
house, the tanks being made of brickwork and cement,
covered with a flatstone,and connected with each other
by stonewarepipes sixinchesin diameter. A leaden pipe
=====PAGE 33=====
SJb THE OUTBREAK OF CHOLERA
conveyed water from each tank to a pump situatedin the
back kitchen. There was a cesspoolbehind each house,
under the privy,and situatedfour feetfrom the water
tank. The ground was opened behind the houses No. 1
and No. 7, and the drains examined under the superin
tendenceof Mr. Grant,theAssistant-Surveyortothe Com
missionersof Sewers. The cesspoolsat both theseplaces
were quitefull,and the overflow-drainfrom thatat No. 1
choked up. At thishouse the respectivelevelsof the cess
pool and the water-tankwere measured, and the top of
the overflow-drainfrom the cesspoolwas found to be fif
teen inchesabove the top of the tank,and the intervening
ground was very wet. The overflow-drainmentioned
above had no bottom,or one so softthatitcould be pene
tratedwith a stick; and itcrossed,at rightangles,above
the earthenwarepipe of the water-tank,thejointsof which
were leaky,and allowedthewater toescape. Behind No. 7,
Mr. Grant found a pipe forbringing surpluswater from
the tanks,communicating with a drainfrom the cesspool;
and he found a flatbrick drain laidover the barrel-drain
before mentioned, which brought the water from the
spring. It appears,from a plan of the property,thatthis
drain,which was continued in a directiontowards the
sewer in BatterseaFields,brought surface-drainage from
the road,and received the drains from the cesspools,the
house-drainsfrom the sinksin the back kitchens,and the
surpluswater,or some of it,from the tanks. There was
every reason to believethat this drainwas stopped up,
but thatwas not ascertained: at alleventsitwas unable
to convey the water flowing into it during the storm on
July 26th,as itburstnear the house No. 8,and inundated
the lower premisesof thatand the adjoininghouse,No. 9,
with foetidwater ; and itwas from thistime thatthe water,
which had occasionallybeen complained of before,was
=====PAGE 34=====
AT ALBION TERRACE. 27
found by most of the people in theseseventeen houses to
be more or lessimpure or disagreeable.The water broke
out of the drain again at No. 8, and overflowed the
kitchens,during a heavy rainon August 2nd. Itshouldbe
particularlyremarked, that the tanks were placed on the
same level,so that pumping from one would draw water
from the others,and that any impurity gettinginto one
tank would consequentlybe imparted to the rest.
The firstcase of cholera occurred at No. 13, on July
28th (two days afterthe burstingof the drain),in a lady
who had had premonitory symptoms for three or four
days. It was fatalin fourteenhours. There was an accu
mulation of rubbish in the cellarof thishouse, which was
said to be offensiveby the person who removed it; but
the proprietorof the house denied this. A lady at No. 8
was attackedwith choleraicdiarrhoeaon July 30th : she
recovered. On August 1st,a lady, aged eighty-one,at
No. 6, who had had some diarrhoeaeight or ten days
before, which had yielded to her own treatment,was
attackedwith cholera: she died on the 4th with congested
brain. Diarrhoea commenced on August 1st in a lady
aged 60, at No. 3 ; collapsetook place on the 5th, and
death on the 6th. On August 3rd, there were three or
four cases,in differentpartsof the row of houses,and two
of them terminatedfatallyon the same day. The attacks
were numerous during the followingthree or four days,
and afterthat time they diminished in number. More
than halftheinhabitantsof thepartof the terracein which
the choleraprevailed,were attackedwith it,and upwards
of half the caseswere fatal. The deaths occurred as fol
lows ; but as some of the patientslingereda few days,and
died in the consecutivefever,the deaths are lessclosely
grouped than the seizures. There was one death on July
28th,two on August 3rd,four on the 4th,two on the 6th,
=====PAGE 35=====
28 THE OUTBREAK OF CHOLERA
two on the 7th,four on the 8th,three on the 9th,one on
the 11th,and one on the 13th. These make twenty fatal
cases; and therewere four or fivedeathsbesidesamongst
thosewho were attackedafterflyingfrom the place.
The fatalcases were distributedover ten out of the
seventeen houses ; and Mr. Mimpriss of Wandsworth
Road, who attendedmany of the cases,and towhose kind
ness I am indebted forseveralof theseparticulars,stated
that cases occurred in the other seven houses,with the
exception of one or two that were empty, or nearly so.
There were fivedeaths in the house No. 6 ; and one of a
gentleman the day afterhe leftit,and went toHampstead
Heath. The entirehousehold,consistingof seven indivi
duals,had the cholera,and sixof them died.
There are no dataforshowing how the diseasewas com
municated to the firstpatient,at No. 13, on July 28th ;
but itwas two or three days afterwards,when the evacua
tionsfrom thispatientmust have enteredthe drainshav
ing a communication with the water supplied to allthe
houses,thatotherpersonswere attacked,and in two days
more the diseaseprevailedto an alarming extent.
I had an opportunityof examining some of the water
removed by Mr. Grant from the tanks behind the houses
No. 1 and No. 7, and alsosome of the depositwhich lay
in the tanks to the depth of from sixto nine inches. The
water was offensive,and the depositpossessedthe odour
of privy soilvery distinctly,I found in itvarious sub
stanceswhich had passed through the alimentarycanal,
having escaped digestion,as the stonesand husks of cur
rants and grapes,and portionsof the thin epidermis of
otherfruitsand vegetables.
Many of thepatientsattributedtheirillnessto the water.
This ishere mentioned to show thatthey had drank of it,
and at the same time found that it was impure. As
=====PAGE 36=====
AT ALBION TERRACE.
explaininghow persons might drink of such water before
findingout itsimpurity,itmay be statedthatthe grosser
part of the materialfrom drainsand cesspoolshas a tend
ency, when mixed with water, to settlerapidly to the
bottom. The only houses suppliedwith the same water,
afterpassing the tanks in Albion Terrace,were four in
Albion Street; but three of these had been empty for
months, and the fourthwas inhabitedby a gentleman who
always suspectedthe water,and would not drink it. There
were two or threepersons attackedwith choleraamongst
those who came to nurse the patientsafterthe water was
condemned, and who, consequently,did not drink it; but
thesepersonswere liable,in waitingon the patient,to get
a smallportionof the evacuationsintothe stomach in the
way firstpointed out ; and there might be food in the
houses,previouslyprepared with the taintedwater. It is
not here implied that every one of the cases in Albion
Terrace was communicated by the water,but thatfarthe
greaterportion of them were ; that,in short,itwas the
circumstance of the choleraevacuationsgettingintothe
water,which caused the diseaseto spread so much beyond
itsordinaryextent.
The mortalityin Albion Terrace was attributedby Dr.
Milroy, in a published report to the General Board of
Health, chieflyto threecauses: first,to an open sewer in
BatterseaFields,which isfour hundred feetto the north
of the terrace,and from which the inhabitantsperceived
a disagreeableodour when the wind was in certaindirec
tions; secondly,to a disagreeableodour from the sinksin
the back kitchens of the houses,which was worse after
the storm of July 26 ; and lastly,to the accumulationin
the house No. 13,beforealludedto. With respectto the
open sewer,there are severalstreetsand linesof houses
as much exposed to any emanationstheremight be from
=====PAGE 37=====
30 IRRUPTIONS OF CHOLERA
it,as thosein which the cholera prevailed; and yet they
were quite free from the malady, as were also nineteen
houses situatedbetween the sewer and Albion Terrace.
As regards the bad smells from the sinks in the kitchen,
theirexistenceisof such every-day and almostuniversal
prevalence,that they do not help to explainan irruption
of choleralikethatunder consideration; indeed,offensive
odours were createdin thousands of houses in London by
the same storm of rainon July 26th ; and the two houses
in which the offensivesmellwas greatest,viz.Nos. 8 and
9— those which were flooded with the contentsof the
drain— were lessseverelyvisitedwith cholera than the
rest; the inhabitantshaving only had diarrhoea,or mild
attacksof cholera. The accumulation in the house No.
13 could not affectthe houses at a distancefrom it. It
remains evident then,that the only specialand peculiar
cause connected with the greatcalamitywhich befelthe
inhabitantsof these houses,was the stateof the water,
which was followed by the cholerain almost every house
to which it extended,whilst allthe surrounding houses
were quite free from the disease. Indeed, the General
Board of Health attributedthe mortalityat thisplaceto
the contaminationof the water,in a manifestowhich they
publishednot long afterDr. Milroy'sreport.*
Dr. Lloyd mentioned some instancesof the effectsof
impure water at the South London Medical Society,on
August 30th,1849.f In SilverStreet,Rotherhithe,there
were eightycases,and thirty-eightdeaths,in the course
of a fortnightearlyin July of that year,at a time when
therewas very littlecholerain any other part of Rother
hithe. The contentsof allthe priviesin thisstreetran
intoa drainwhich had once had a communication with the
* See " London Gazette",18th Sept.1849.
+ See Report in " Med. Gaz.",vol.ii,1849,p.429.
=====PAGE 38=====
IN ROTHERHITHE. 31
Thames ; and the people got theirsupply of water from a
well situatedvery near the end of the drain,with the
contentsof which thewater got contaminated. Dr. Lloyd
informed me thatthe fetidwater from the drain could he
seen dribbling through the side of the well,above the
surfaceof the water. Amongst other sanitarymeasures
recommended by Dr. Lloyd was the fillingup of thewell;
and the cholera ceased in Silver Streetas soon as the
people gave over using the water. Another instanceal
luded to by Dr. Lloyd, was CharlottePlace,in Rother-
hithe,consistingof seven houses,the inhabitantsof which,
exceptingthoseof one house, obtainedtheirwater from a
ditchcommunicating with the Thames, and receivingthe
contentsof the priviesof allthe seven houses. In these
houses therewere twenty-fivecasesof cholera,and four
teen deaths; one of the houses had a pump railedoff,to
which the inhabitantsof the other houses had no access,
and therewas but one casein thathouse.
The followinginstance,aswell as some othersof a simi
larkind, isrelatedin the " Report of the General Board
of Health on the Cholera of 1848 and 1849."
" In Manchester, a sudden and violentoutbreak of
choleraoccurred in Hope Street,Salford. The inhabit
antsused water from a particularpump-well. This well
had been repaired,and a sewer which passeswithin nine
inchesof the edge of it became accidentallystopped up,
and leaked intothewell. The inhabitantsof thirtyhouses
used the water from thiswell; among them thereoccurred
nineteen cases of diarrhoea,twenty-sixcases of cholera,
and twenty-fivedeaths. The inhabitantsof sixtyhouses
in the same immediate neighbourhood used otherwater ;
among thesethereoccurred eleven casesof diarrhoea,but
not a singlecaseof cholera,nor one death. It isremark
able,that,in thisinstance,out of the twenty-sixpersons
=====PAGE 39=====
6% THE OUTBREAK OF CHOLERA
attackedwith cholera,the whole perishedexcept one."—
Page 62.
Dr. Thomas King Chambers informed me, that at II-
ford,in Essex, in the summer of 1849, the cholera pre
vailedvery severelyin a row of houses a littleway from
the main partof the town. It had visitedevery house in
the row but one. The refusewhich overflowed from the
priviesand a pigstycould be seen running into the well
over the surfaceof the ground, and the water was very
fetid; yet it was used by the people in allthe houses
except thatwhich had escaped cholera. That house was
inhabitedby a woman who took linen to wash, and she,
findingthat the water gave the linen an offensivesmell,
paid a person to fetchwater forher from the pump in the
town, and thiswater she used for culinarypurposes,as
well as forwashing.
The followingcircumstancewas relatedto me, at the
time itoccurred,by a gentleman well acquaintedwith all
the particulars.The drainage from the cesspoolsfound
itsway into the well attachedto some houses at Locks-
brook, near Bath, and the choleramaking itsappearance
there in the autumn of 1849, became very fatal. The
people complained of the water to the gentleman belong
ing to the property,who lived atWeston, in Bath, and
he sent a surveyor,who reported that nothing was the
matter. The tenantsstillcomplaining,the owner went
himself,and on looking at the water and smellingit,he
said that he could perceive nothing the matter with it.
He was asked ifhe would tasteit,and he drank a glassof
it. This occurred on a Wednesday ; he went home, was
taken illwith the cholera,and died on the Saturday fol
lowing,therebeing no cholerain his own neighbourhood
at the time.
There is no spot in thiscountry in which the cholera
=====PAGE 40=====
AT NEWBURN, ON THE TYNE. 33
was more fatalduring the epidemic of 1832 than the vil
lage of Newburn, near Newcastle-upon-Tyne. We are
informed, in an excellentpaper on the subjectby Dr.
David Craigie,*that exactlyone-tenthof the population
died. The number of the inhabitantswas fivehundred
and fifty; of these,three hundred and twenty suffered
from the epidemic,eitherin the form of diarrhoeaor the
more confirmeddisease,and the deathsamounted to fifty-
five. Being aware of thismortality,I wrote, about the
beginning of the year 1849, to a friend in Newcastle—
Dr. Embleton — to make inquiriesrespectingthe water
used at Newburn, and he kindly procured me some in
formationfrom the Rev. John Reed, of Newburn Vicar
age,which I receivedin February, as well as an answer
from Mr. Davison, surgeon,of Newburn, to whom I had
writtenin the meantime. I learntfrom thesecommuni
cationsthatthe people were suppliedwith water in 1832,
as they stillwere, from three wells,two of which were
very littleused, and that the water in the thirdwell was
derived from the workings of an old coal-minenear the
village. The water of thiswell,as I was informed,al
though generallygood when firstdrawn, became putrid
afterbeing kept two days. It was considered that the
evacuationsof the people could not get into any of the
wells;but thevicarthought thatthe water of a littlebrook
which runs past the village,and fallsinto the Tyne im
mediately afterwards,might find itsway into that well
which ischieflyresortedto. Putrefaction,on being kept
a day or two,isso much the characterof water containing
animal matter,that,afterreceivingconfirmationof my
views respectingthe communication of cholera by water
from many otherplaces,I wrote to Mr. Davison again on
the subject,and he kindly took a greatdeal of troubleto
* Edin. Med. and Sur.Jour.,vol.xxxvii.
=====PAGE 41=====
34 ON THE MODE OF
investigatethe matter further. He informed me that the
brook was principallyformed by water which was con
stantlypumped from coal-pitsin the neighbourhood.
About half a mile beforereaching Newburn itreceived
the refuseof a smallvillage,and between thatvillageand
Newburn itran through a privy used by the workmen of
a steelfactory. In Newburn thisbrook receivedthe con
tentsof the open drainsor guttersfrom the houses. The
drain which conveyed water from a coalmine or driftnot
worked fora greatnumber of years,to the well mentioned
above, passed underneath the brook at one part of its
course,and from thatpoint ran alongsideof the brook to
the well,— a distanceof about threehundred yards. Mr.
Davison said that itwas disputedwhether therewas any
communication between the drain and the brook,but that
itwas highly probable thatthere might be ; and thatan
occurrence which took place a few months previously
seemed to prove that therewas. Some gas-water from
the steelmanufactory mentioned above got by accident
intothe brook, and some of the people affirmedthatthe
water in thewell was stronglyimpregnated with it.
The firstcase of cholera in Newburn was that of a
young man livingcloseto the brook, about a hundred
yards above the place at which it passes the well. He
was taken illon the £9th December, 1831, and died,in
the stage of consecutivefever, on January 4th, 1832.
There were some casesof diarrhoeain the village,but no
new cases of cholera tillthe night of January the 9th,
during which night and the followingmorning thirteen
persons were taken ill. During the night of the 12th
four personswere attacked; by the 15th therewere four
teen new cases,and on thisday the latevicar died— the
Rev. John Edmonston. By the next day at noon there
were at leastfiftynew cases. A few days afterthisthe
=====PAGE 42=====
COMMUNICATION OF CHOLERA. 35
diseasebegan to subside,and by the 2nd of February had
almost disappeared. As severaldays elapsedbetween the
firstcaseof choleraand the greatoutbreak,itisprobable
that the water in which the soiledlinen must have been
washed, and which would necessarilyrun intothe brook,
was the means of communicating the diseaseto the thir
teen personstaken illon the night between the 9th and
10th of January ; unless,indeed,the intermediatecases
of diarrhoeacould transmitthe disease.
The followingpassage isfrom the reportof Mr. Cruik-
shanks on the outbreak of cholera in 1814, previously
alluded to as occurring in a battalionon itsmarch from
Jaulnah to Trichinopoly.
" It was the beliefof the natives,strenuouslyfostered
and inculcatedby theirspiritualguides,thatthe epidemic
was the immediate consequence of the wrath of Heaven,
outraged and insultedby the pollutionof certainsacred
tanks, situatedat the villageof Cunnatore, in which
sepoys of low casteand camp followershad indiscrimi
nately bathed. Such we may not regard as affordinga
very satisfactorysolutionof the difficulty; yet itleads,I
think,directlyto the true point of inquiry. At Cunna
tore,the forcewas so encamped, thatwhile the 5th Native
Infantry on the right had theirsuppliesof water from
wells,the puckalliesof the 9th Native Infantryprocured
water forthatbattalionfrom tankssituatedon low ground
on the leftof the line. The fact,that the diseasefirst
broke forthin a day or two afterpassingCunnatore ; the
prevailingopinionof the natives,thatitoriginatedthere,
and thatsomehow itwas connected with the tanks; a de
sireto discoversome one cause confinedin itsinfluence
and operationto one out of the two battalions; lastly,the
difficultyor impossibilityof lightingon any other; all
theseled to inquiry,and to ascertainingwith a consider
d 2
=====PAGE 43=====
86 CHOLERA IN THE
able degree of certainty,that each battalionwas supplied
with water from a source distinctfrom the other."* The
cholerawas said not to be at Cunnatore at the time the
infantrywere encamped there,but thiswas probably a
mistake.
The followingquotationis from a letterby a medical
officerin the Black Sea fleet,dated Baljik,August 23,
1854, and publishedin the Medical Times and Gazetteof
September 30th.
" A week afterthe return of the fleetto Baljik,on the
7th of August, about four thousand French troops en
camped on the heightsabreastour anchorage. These were
part of the firstdivisionof the army thathad marched to
Kostenje, about ten days before. By it the firstblood
had been drawn on the part of the alliedarmy. The loss
in battlewas small,but they had encountered an enemy
more terriblethan the Russians. The cholera.had broken
out among them, and attackingfour hundred on the first
night had destroyedsixty. The totallosshad been some
thing incredible. Itwas said,thatout of eleventhousand
men, not lessthan fivethousand had perished in a few
days. This dreadfulcalamitywas attributedto drinking
water from wellsthat had been poisoned by throwing in
putrid carcases.
" Putting aside the questionof intentionalpoisoning,
which always presents itselfas the most ready way of
accountingforsuch destruction,perhaps some support to
the theory, that water is the medium by which cholera
poison is conveyed, may be found in thiscircumstance,
and in another of which I was witness. These soldiers,
wearied by marching from a focus of cholerainfection,
were seen, many of them, washing their persons and
clothingin the stream from which allthe French shipsof
* Scot," Report on the Epidemic Cholera",p.237.
=====PAGE 44=====
BLACK SEA FLEET. 87
war, and the majorityof the English fleet,obtained their
supply of water. This was going on on the 7th and 8th,
and, on the nightsof the 9th and 10th,the diseaseburst
out with greatviolenceamong the crews of severalships.
" Some English ships were the firstto suffer,on the
night of the 9th, and they proceeded to sea next morn
ing. On the night of the 10th,other English ships,and
some of the French, began to suffer; and the latterin an
almostunparalleledmanner.
" The two admirals'ships,Montebelloand Villede Paris,
were terriblyaffected.On the previous day they had
been in as healthy a stateas usual; and in the night the
cholera attacked,in the former, two hundred men, of
whom fortylay dead in the morning ; and in the Villede
Paris there were also many deaths. The French fleet
sailedon the afternoon of the 11th; and the following
morning saw the English shipsalsoat sea.
* * * *
" On this day (the 14th),about noon, the Britannia,
which had leftport in a favourablecondition,was attacked
suddenly,and in twenty hours upwards of fiftyof her crew
had expired. We knew nothing of the calamitythathad
overwhelmed our leaderuntilthefollowingmorning,when
'reportsof the sick'were sentfrom each shiptothe admi
ral. By thistime (the evening of the 16th),eightyhad
died,and more than two hundred remained in greateror
lessdanger.
" The night of the 16th must have been one of great
consternationon board her. The epidemic went on with
unchecked violence; the officerswere voluntarilyattend
ing on the sick; and the very few of the crew who had
not been attacked,or who were not assistingtheirunfor-
tuate messmates,were found quite insufficientto perform
the duties of a ship when under sail; and the admiral,
=====PAGE 45=====
38 THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE.
therefore,determined to return to Baljik,takingwith him
the Trafalgar and Albion,alsobadly affected.
" The crew of the Britannia were at once sent away
from the ship,in small parties,intothe numerous trans
portsthatremained idle; and itappears that,by thispro
cedure, the epidemic influencesoperating among them
have been greatlymoderated,ifnot extirpated."
The most terribleoutbreak of cholerawhich ever occur
red in thiskingdom, isprobably thatwhich took placein
Broad Street,Golden Square, and the adjoiningstreets,a
few weeks ago. Within two hundred and fiftyyards of
the spotwhere Cambridge StreetjoinsBroad Street,there
were upwards of fivehundred fatalattacksof cholerain
ten days. The mortalityin this limited area probably
equals any thatwas ever caused in thiscountry,even by
the plague ; and itwas much more sudden, as the greater
number of casesterminatedin a few hours. The mortality
would undoubtedly have been much greaterhad it not
been fortheflightof the population.Persons in furnished
lodgings leftfirst,then otherlodgerswent away, leaving
theirfurnitureto be sent forwhen they could meet with
a placeto put itin. Many houses were closedaltogether,
owing to the death of the proprietors; and, in a great
number of instances,the tradesmen who remained had
sentaway theirfamilies: so thatin lessthan sixdays from
the commencement of the outbreak, the most afflicted
streetswere desertedby more than three-quartersof their
inhabitants.
There were a few casesof cholerain the neighbourhood
of Broad Street,Golden Square, in the latterpart of
A ugust; and the so-calledoutbreak,which commenced in
the nightbetween the 31stAugust and the 1stSeptember,
was, as in allsimilarinstances,only a violentincreaseof
the malady. As soon as I became acquainted with the
=====PAGE 46=====
THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE. 39
situationand extent of thisirruptionof cholera,I sus
pected some contamination of the water of the much-
frequented street-pump in Broad Street,near the end of
Cambridge Street; but on examining the water,on the
evening of the 3rd September, I found so littleimpurity
in it of an organic nature,thatI hesitatedto come to a
conclusion. Further inquiry,however, showed me that
therewas no other circumstanceor agent common to the
circumscribedlocalityin which this sudden increaseof
choleraoccurred,and not extending beyond it,except the
water of the above mentioned pump. I found, moreover,
that the water varied,during the next two days,in the
amount of organic impurity,visibleto the naked eye,on
closeinspection,in the form of smallwhite,flocculentpar
ticles; and I concluded that,at the commencement of the
outbreak,it might possiblyhave been stillmore impure.
I requested permission,therefore,to take a list,at the
General RegisterOffice,of the deathsfrom cholera,regis
teredduring the week ending 2nd September, in the sub-
districtsof Golden Square,Berwick Street,and St.Ann's,
Soho, which was kindly granted. Eighty-nine deaths
from cholerawere registered,during the week, in thethree
subdistricts.Of these,only sixoccurred in the four first
days of the week ; four occurred on Thursday, the 31st
August ; and the remaining seventy-nineon Friday and
Saturday. I considered,therefore,thatthe outbreakcom
menced on the Thursday ; and I made inquiry,in detail,
respectingthe eighty-threedeaths registeredas having
taken placeduring the lastthreedays of the week.
On proceeding to the spot,I found that nearly allthe
deaths had taken place within a short distanceof the
pump. There were only ten deaths in houses situated
decidedlynearer to another streetpump. In fiveof these
casesthe familiesof the deceased persons informed me
=====PAGE 47=====
40 THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE.
that they always sent to the pump in Broad Street,as
they preferredthe water to that of the pump which was
nearer. In threeothercases,the deceased were children
who went to schoolnear the pump in Broad Street. Two
of them were known to drink the water ; and the parents
of the third think it prohable that itdid so. The other
two deaths,beyond the districtwhich thispump supplies,
representonly the amount of mortalityfrom cholerathat
was occurringbeforethe irruptiontook place.
With regard to the deaths occurringin the localitybe
longing to the pump, there were sixty-oneinstancesin
which I was informed that the deceased persons used to
drink thepump-water from Broad Street,eitherconstantly
or occasionally.In sixinstancesI could get no informa
tion,owing to the death or departure of every one con
nected with the deceased individuals; and in sixcasesI
was informed thatthe deceased persons did not drink the
pump-water beforetheirillness.
The resultof the inquirythen was, thattherehad been
no particularoutbreak or increase of cholera,in this
part of London, except among the personswho were in
the habit of drinking the water of the above-mentioned
pump-well.
I had an interviewwith the Board of Guardians of St.
James's parish,on the evening of Thursday, 7th Septem
ber,and representedtheabove circumstancestothem. In
consequence of what I said,the handle of the pump was
removed on the followingday.
Besides the eighty-threedeaths mentioned above as
occurringon the three lastdays of the week ending Sep
tember 2nd, and being registeredduring that week in
the sub-districtsin which the attacksoccurred,a num
ber of persons died in Middlesex and other hospitals,
and a great number of deaths which took place in the
=====PAGE 48=====
THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE. 41
localityduring the lasttwo days of the week, were not
registeredtillthe week following.The deathsaltogether,
on the 1stand 2nd of September, which have been ascer
tained to belong to thisoutbreak of cholera,were one
hundred and ninety-seven; and many personswho were
attacked about the same time as these,died afterwards.
I should have been glad to inquirerespectingthe use of
the water from Broad Streetpump in allthese instances,
but was engaged at the time in an inquiryin the south
districtsof London, which willbe alludedto afterwards;
and when I began to make fresh inquiriesin the neigh
bourhood of Golden Square, aftertwo or threeweeks had
elapsed,I found that there had been such a distribution
of the remaining populationthat itwould be impossible
to arrive at a complete account of the circumstances.
There is no reason to suppose,however, thata more ex
tended inquirywould have yieldeda differentresultfrom
thatwhich was obtainedrespectingthe eighty-threedeaths
which happened to be registeredwithin the districtof
the outbreak before the end of the week in which it
occurred.
The additionalfactsthatI have been ableto ascertain
arein accordancewith thoseabove related; and as regards
the small number of those attacked,who were believed
not to have drank the water from Broad Streetpump, it
must be obviousthatthere are variousways in which the
deceased persons may have taken it without the know
ledge of theirfriends. The water was used for mixing
with spiritsin allthe publichouses around. It was used
likewiseat dining-rooms and coffee-shops.The keeper
of a coffee-shopin the neighbourhood, which was fre
quented by mechanics, and where the pump-water was
suppliedat dinner time,informed me (on 6th September)
that she was alreadyaware of nine of her customerswho
=====PAGE 49=====
42 THK CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE.
were dead. The pump-water was also sold in various
littleshops,with a teaspoonfulof effervescingpowder in
it,under the name of sherbet; and itmay have been dis
tributed in various other ways with which I am unac
quainted. The pump was frequentedmuch more than is
usual,even fora London pump in a populous neighbour
hood.
There are certaincircumstancesbearing on the subject
of thisoutbreak of cholerawhich requiretobe mentioned.
The Workhouse in Poland Street is more than three-
fourthssurrounded by housesinwhich deathsfrom cholera
occurred,yet out of fivehundred and thirty-fiveinmates
only five died of cholera,the other deaths which took
place being those of persons admitted afterthey were
attacked. The workhouse has a pump- well on the pre
mises,in additionto the supply from the Grand Junction
Water Works, and the inmates never sentto Broad Street
for water. If the mortalityin the workhouse had been
equal to thatin the streetsimmediately surrounding iton
threesides,upwards of one hundred personswould have
died.
There isa Brewery in Broad Street,near to the pump,
and on perceivingthat no brewer's men were registered
as having died of cholera,I calledon Mr. Huggins, the
proprietor.He informed me thattherewere above seventy
workmen employed in thebrewery, and thatnone of them
had sufferedfrom cholera,— at leastin a severe form,—
only two having been indisposed,and that not seriously,
at the time the diseaseprevailed. The men are allowed a
certainquantityof malt liquor,and Mr. Huggins believes
they do not drink water at all; and he is quite certain
thatthe workmen never obtainedwater from the pump in
the street. There isa deep well in the brewery, in addi
tionto the New River water.
=====PAGE 50=====
THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE. 43
At the percussion-capmanufactory, 37 Broad Street,
where, I understand,about two hundred workpeople were
employed, two tubs were kept on the premises always
suppliedwith water from the pump in the street,forthose
to drink who wished ; and eighteen of theseworkpeople
died of choleraat theirown homes, sixteenmen and two
women.
Mr. Marshall, surgeon, of Greek Street,was kind
enough to inquire respectingseven workmen who had
been employed in the manufactory of dentists'materials,
at Nos. 8 and 9 Broad Street,and who died at theirown
homes. He learned that they were allin the habit of
drinkingwater from the pump, generallydrinking about
half-a-pintonce or twice a day ; while two personswho
resideconstantlyon the premises,but do not drink the
pump-water, only had diarrhoea. Mr. Marshall alsoin
formed me of the caseof an officerin the army, who lived
at St.John's Wood, but came to dine in Wardour Street,
where he drank the water from Broad Streetpump at his
dinner. He was attackedwith cholera,and died in a few
hours.
I am indebted to Mr. Marshall forthe followingcases,
which are interestingas showing the periodof incubation,
which in these three caseswas from thirty-sixto forty-
eight hours. Mrs. , of 13 Bentinck Street,Berwick
Street,aged 28, in the eighth month of pregnancy, went
herself(although they were not usually,water drinkers),
on Sunday, 3rd September, to Broad Street pump for
water. The familyremoved to Gravesend on the follow
ing day ; and she was attackedwith choleraon Tuesday
morning at seven o'clock,and died of consecutivefever
on 15th September, having been delivered. Two of her
childrendrank alsoof thewater,and were attackedon the
same day as the mother, but recovered.
=====PAGE 51=====
44 THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE.
Dr. Fraser, of Oakley Square, kindly informed me of
the following circumstance. A gentleman in delicate
health was sent for from Brighton to see his brother at
6 Poland Street,who was attackedwith cholera and died
in twelve hours, on 1st September. The gentleman
arrivedafterhisbrother'sdeath,and did not see the body.
He only stayedabout twenty minutes in the house,where
he took a hasty and scantyluncheon of rumpsteak, taking
with ita small tumbler of brandy and water, the water
being from Broad Streetpump. He went to Pentonville,
and was attackedwith choleraon the evening of the fol
lowing day, 2nd September, and died the next evening.
Dr. Fraseralsofirstcalledmy attentionto the following
circumstances,which are perhaps the most conclusiveof
allin proving the connexion between the Broad Street
pump and the outbreak of cholera. In the "Weekly
Return of Births and Deaths" of September 9th,the fol
lowing death is recorded as occurring in the Hampstead
district: " At West End, on 2nd September, the widow
of a percussion-capmaker, aged 59 years,diarrhoeatwo
hours,choleraepidemica sixteenhours."
I was informed by thislady'sson thatshe had not been
in the neighbourhood of Broad Streetformany months.
A cartwent from Broad Streetto West End every day,
and itwas the custom to take out a large bottleof the
water from the pump in Broad Street,as she preferredit.
The water was taken on Thursday, 31stAugust, and she
drank of it in the evening,and alsoon Friday. She was
seizedwith choleraon the evening of the latterday, and
died on Saturday,as the above quotationfrom the register
shows. A niece,who was on a visitto this lady, also
drank of the water ; she returned to her residence,in a
high and healthy part of Islington,was attacked with
cholera,and died also.There was no choleraat the time,
=====PAGE 52=====
THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE. 45
eitherat West End or in the neighbourhood where the
niecedied. Besides these two persons,only one servant
partook of the water at Hampstead West End, and she
did not suffer,or,at least,not severely.There were many
persons who drank the water from Broad Street pump
about the time of the outbreak,without being attacked
with cholera; but this does not diminish the evidence
respectingthe influenceof the water,forreasonsthatwill
be fullystatedin another part of thiswork.
The deathswhich occurred during thisfataloutbreak
of choleraare indicatedin the accompanying map, as far
as I could ascertainthem. There are necessarilysome
deficiencies,for in a few of the instancesof personswho
died in the hospitalsaftertheirremoval from the neigh
bourhood of Broad Street,the number of the house from
which they had been removed was not registered. The
addressof thosewho died aftertheirremoval toSt.James's
Workhouse was not registered; and I was only able to
obtain it,in a part of the cases,on applicationat the
Master'sOffice,formany of the persons were too ill,when
admitted,to give any account of themselves. In the case
alsoof some of the workpeople and otherswho contracted
the cholera in thisneighbourhood, and died in different
partsof London, the precisehouse from which they had
removed is not statedin the return of deaths. I have
heard of some persons who died in the country shortly
afterremoving from the neighbourhood of Broad Street;
and there must, no doubt, be severalcasesof thiskind
thatI have not heard of. Indeed, the fullextentof the
calamitywillprobably never be known. The deficiencies
I have mentioned, however, probably do not detractfrom
the correctnessof the map as a diagram of the topography
of the outbreak; for,if the localityof the few additional
casescould be ascertained,they would probably be distri
=====PAGE 53=====
46 THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE.
tributedover the districtof the outbreak in the same pro
portionas the largenumber which are known.
The dotted lineon the map surrounds the sub-districts
of Golden Square, St.James's, and Berwick Street,St.
James's,togetherwith the adjoiningportion of the sub-
districtof St.Anne, Soho, extending from Wardour Street
to Dean Street,and a smallpart of the sub-districtof St.
James's Square enclosedby Marylebone Street,Titchneld
Street,Great Windmill Street,and Brewer Street. All
the deathsfrom cholerawhich were registeredin the six
weeks from 19th August to 30th September within this
locality,as well as thoseof personsremoved intoMiddle
sex Hospital,are shown in the map* by a black linein
the situationof the house in which it occurred,or in
which the fatalattackwas contracted.
In additionto these the deathsof persons removed to
UniversityCollegeHospital,toCharing CrossHospital,and
tovariouspartsofLondon, areindicatedinthe map, where
the exact addresswas given in the " Weekly Return of
Deaths," or,when I could learnitby privateinquiry.
The pump in Broad Streetis indicatedon the map, as
well as allthe surrounding pumps to which the public
had accessat the time. It requiresto be statedthat the
water of the pump in Marlborough Street,at the end of
Carnaby Street,was so impure thatmany people avoided
using it. And I found that the persons who died near
thispump in the beginning of September, had water from
the Broad Streetpump. With regard to the pump in Ru
pert Street,itwillbe noticed thatsome streetswhich are
near to iton the map, are in facta good way removed, on
* The particularsof each death connectedwith thisoutbreakwere pub
lishedin the " Weekly Returns"ofthe Registrar-Generalto 16th Septem
ber,and I procuredthe remainder through the kindnessof the Registrar-
General and the DistrictRegistrars.
=====PAGE 54=====
THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE. 47
account of the circuitousroad to it. These circumstances
being taken into account, it will be observed that the
deaths eithervery much diminished,or ceased altogether,
at every pointwhere itbecomes decidedlynearer to send
to another pump than to the one in Broad Street. It may
alsobe noticedthatthe deaths are most numerous near to
the pump where the water could be more readilyob
tained. The wide open streetin which the pump issitu
ated sufferedmost, and next the streetsbranching from
it,and especiallythosepartsof them which are nearestto
Broad Street. If there have been fewer deaths in the
south half of Poland Street than in some other streets
leading from Broad Street,it is no doubt because this
streetislessdenselyinhabited.
In some of the instances,where the deathsare scattered
a littlefurtherfrom the reston the map, the malady was
probably contractedat a nearer point to the pump. A
cabinet-maker,who was removed from Philip'sCourt,
Noel Street,to Middlesex Hospital,worked in Broad
Street. A boy alsowho died in Noel Street,went to the
National schoolat the end of Broad Street,and having to
pass the pump, probably drank of the water. A tailor,
who died at 6, Heddon Court, Regent Street,spent most
of histime in Broad Street. A woman, removed to the
hospitalfrom 10, Heddon Court, had been nursing a
person who died of cholera in Marshall Street. A little
girl,who died in Ham Yard, and another who died in
Angel Court,Great 4WindmillStreet,went tothe schoolin
Dufour's Place, Broad Street,and were in the habit of
drinking the pump-water, as were also a child from
Naylor'sYard, and severalothers,who went to thisand
otherschoolsnear the pump in Broad Street. A woman
who died at 2, Great Chapel Street,Oxford Street,had
been occupied fortwo days preceding her illnessat the
=====PAGE 55=====
48 THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE.
publicwash-housesnear the pump, and used to drink a
good deal of water whilst at her work ; the water drank
therebeing sometimes from the pump and sometimes from
the cistern.
The limited districtin which thisoutbreak of cholera
occurred, containsa great varietyin the qualityof the
streetsand houses ; Poland Streetand Great Pulteney
Street consistingin a great measure of private houses
occupied by one family,whilstHusband Streetand Peter
Street are occupied chieflyby the poor Irish. The re
maining streetsare intermediatein point of respecta
bility. The mortality appears to have fallen pretty
equallyamongst allclasses,in proportionto theirnum
bers. Masters are not distinguishedfrom journeymen in
the registrationreturnsof thisdistrict,but,judging from
my own observation,I consider that out of rather more
than six hundred deaths,therewere about one hundred
in the familiesof tradesmen and other residenthouse
holders. One hundred and fivepersons who had been
removed from thisdistrictdied in Middlesex, University
College, and other hospitals,and two hundred and six
persons were buried at the expense of St.James's parish;
the latternumber includesmany of thosewho died in the
hospitals,and a great number who were far from being
paupers, and would on any other occasion have been
buried by theirfriends,who, at thistime,were eithernot
aware of the calamity or were themselves overwhelmed
by it. The greatestportionof the personswho died were
tailorsand other operatives,who worked for the shops
about Bond Streetand Regent Street,and the wives and
childrenof theseoperatives. They were livingchieflyin
rooms which they rented by the week.
The followingtableexhibitsthe chronologicalfeatures
of thisterribleoutbreak of cholera.
=====PAGE 56=====
TABLE I.
Date.
August
No. ofFatalAttacks.
September
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
1
n 3
» 4
» 5
» 6
n 7
;> 8
» 9
n 10
>> 11
» 12
» 13
jj 14
» 15
jj 16
jj 17
j? 18
» 19
>> 20
jj 21
» 22
)j 23
» 24
jj 25
J! 26
JJ 27
» 28
J> 29
» 30
Date unknown
Total
8
56
143
116
54
46
36
20
28
12
11
5
5
1
3
0
1
4
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
45
616
Deaths.
1
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
1
2
3
70
127
76
71
45
37
32
30
24
18
15
(i
13
6
8
6
5
2
3
0
0
2
3
0
o
2
0
2
1
0
0
616
=====PAGE 57=====
50 THE CHOLEKA NEAK GOLDEN SQTJAKE.
The deaths in the above tableare compiled from the
sources mentioned above in describing the map ; but
some deathswhich were omittedfrom the map on account
of the number of the house not being known, are
included in the table. As regards the date of attack,I
was able to obtain it with great precision,through the
kindness of Mr. Sibley, in upwards of eighty deaths
which occurred in Middlesex Hospital; for the hour of
admission was entered in the hospitalbooks, as well as
the previousdurationof the illness.In a few other cases
alsoI had exactinformationof the hour of attack,and in
the remainder I have calculatedit by subtractingthe
duration of the illnessfrom the date of death. Where
the illnessdid not exceed twelve hours,the attackwas
consideredto have commenced the same day ; where the
illnessexceeded twelve,and did not exceed thirty-six
hours,the attackwas put down to the previousday, and
so on. Where the illnessexceeded forty-eighthours,its
duration is generally given in days, which were sub
tractedfrom the date of the attack. Although thisplan
does not always give the precisedate of attack,itreaches
within a few hours of it,and is as valuableperhaps as if
the exact day were given,unless the hour as well as the
day could be introduced into the table. Where pre
monitory diarrhoeaisstatedto have existed,the period of
itsduration is deducted from the date of death,and, in
fact,the time of attackisfixedat the firstcommencement
of indisposition,except in two or threeinstancesin which
the patient was labouring under another disease,as
phthisisor typhus fever. There are forty-fivecases in
which the duration of the illnesswas not certified,or
entered in the books of the registrars,and the time of
attackin these cases is consequently unknown. These
personsnearly alldied in the firstdays of September, in
=====PAGE 58=====
THE CHOLERA NEAR GOLDEN SQUARE. 51
the height of the calamity,and it is almost certainthat
they were cut offvery quickly,like the otherswho died
at thistime.
It isprettycertainthatvery few of the fifty-sixattacks
placed in the table to the 31stAugust occurred tilllate
in the evening of thatday. The irruptionwas extremely
sudden, as I learn from the medical men livingin the
midst of the district,and commenced in the nightbetween
the 31stAugust and 1stSeptember. There was hardly
any premonitory diarrhoeain the cases which occurred
during the firstthree days of the outbreak; and I have
been informed by severalmedical men, thatvery few of
the cases which they attended on those days ended in
recovery.
The greatestnumber of attacksin any one day occurred
on the 1stof September, immediately afterthe outbreak
commenced. The followingday the attacksfellfrom one
hundred and forty-threeto one hundred and sixteen,and
the day afterwardsto fifty-four.A glance at the above
tablewillshow thatthe freshattackscontinuedto become
lessnumerous every day. On September the 8th— the
day when the handle of the pump was removed — there
were twelveattacks; on the9th,eleven; on the 10th,five;
on the 11th,five; on the 12th,only one ; and afterthis'
time,therewere never more than fourattackson one day.
During the declineof the epidemic the deathswere more
numerous than the attacks,owing to the deceaseof many
personswho had lingeredforseveraldays in consecutive
fever.
There is no doubt thatthe mortalitywas much dimin
ished,as I said before,by the flightof the population,
which commenced soon afterthe outbreak; but the attacks
had so far diminished before the use of the water was
stopped,that it is impossibleto decide whether the well
x2
=====PAGE 59=====
52 THE PUMP-WELL
stillcontained the cholera poison in an activestate,or
whether, from some cause, the water had become free
from it. The pump-well has been opened, and I was in
formed by Mr. Farrell,the superintendentof the works,
thattherewas no hole or crevicein the brickwork of the
well,by which any impurity might enter; consequently
in thisrespectthe contaminationof the water isnot made
out by the kind of physical evidence detailedin some of
the instancespreviouslyrelated. I understand that the
well isfrom twenty-eightto thirtyfeetin depth,and goes
through the gravel to the surfaceof the clay beneath.
The sewer,which passeswithin a few yards of the well,
is twenty-two feetbelow the surface. The water at the
time of the cholera contained impuritiesof an organic
nature,in the form of minute whitishflocculi,visibleon
closeinspectionto the naked eye,as I beforestated. Dr.
Hassall,who was good enough to examine some of this
water with the microscope,informed me that these par
ticleshad no organised structure,and that he thought
they probablyresultedfrom decompositionof othermatter.
He found a greatnumber of very minute ovalanimalcules
in the water,which are of no importance,except as an
additionalproof that the water contained organicmatter
4on which they lived. The water also contained a large
quantityof chlorides,indicating,no doubt, the impure
sourcesfrom which the springissupplied. Mr. Eley, the
percussion-capmanufacturer of 37 Broad Street,informed
me thathe had long noticed that the water became offen
sive,both to the smell and taste,afterit had been kept
about two days. This,as I noticedbefore,isa characterof
water contaminated with sewage. Another person had
noticed formonths that a film formed on the surfaceof
the water when ithad been kept a few hours.
I inquiredof many persons whether they had observed
=====PAGE 60=====
IN BROAD STREET, GOLDEN SQUARE. 53
any change in the characterof the water,about the time
of the outbreakof cholera,and was answered in the nega
tive. I afterwards,however, met with the followingim
portantinformationon thispoint. Mr. Gould, the eminent
ornithologist,livesnear the pump in Broad Street,and
was in the habit of drinking the water. He was out of
town at the commencement of the outbreak of cholera,but
came home on Saturday morning, 2nd September, and
sent for some of the water almost immediately,when he
was much surprisedto findthatithad an offensivesmell,
although perfectlytransparentand fresh from the pump.
He did not drink any of it. Mr. Gould's assistant,Mr.
Prince,had hisattentiondrawn tothe water,and perceived
itsoffensivesmell. A servant of Mr. Gould who drank
the pump water daily,and drank a good deal of it on
August 31st,was seizedwith choleraat an earlyhour on
September 1st. She ultimatelyrecovered.
Whether the impuritiesof the water were derived from
the sewers, the drains,or the cesspools,of which latter
there are a number in the neighbourhood, I cannot tell.
I have been informed by an eminent engineer,thatwhilst
a cesspoolin a claysoilrequiresto be emptied every six
or eightmonths, one sunk in the gravelwilloftengo for
twenty years without being emptied, owing to the soluble
matterspassingaway intothe land-springsby percolation.
As there had been deaths from cholerajust before the
greatoutbreak not farfrom thispump-well, and in a situ
ation elevateda few feet above it,the evacuationsfrom
the patientsmight of course be amongst the impurities
findingtheirway intothe water,and judging the matter
by the lightderived from otherfactsand considerations
previouslydetailed,we must conclude that such was the
case. A very importantpointin respecttothispump-well
is that the water passed with almost everybody as being
=====PAGE 61=====
54 PUMP-WELL, BROAD ST., GOLDEN SQ.
perfectlypure,and itdid in factcontaina lessquantityof
impurity than the water of some otherpumps in the same
parish,which had no sharein the propagationof cholera.
We must conclude from this outbreak thatthe quantity
of morbid matter which issufficientto produce cholerais
inconceivablysmall,and thatthe shallowpump-wells in a
town cannot be looked on with too much suspicion,what
ever theirlocalreputationmay be.
Whilst the presumed contaminationof the water of the
Broad Streetpump with theevacuationsofcholerapatients,
affordsan exact explanationof the fearfuloutbreak of
cholera in St.James's parish,there is no other circum
stancewhich offersany explanationat all,whatever hypo
thesisof the nature and cause of the malady be adopted.
Many persons were inclinedto attributethe severityof
the malady in this localityto the very circumstance to
which some people attributethe comparativeimmunity of
the cityof London from the same disease,viz.,to the
drainsin the neighbourhood having been disturbedand
put in orderabout halfa year previously.Mr. Bazelgette,
however, pointed out,in a report to the commissioners,
that the streetsin which the new sewers had been made
sufferedlessthan the others; and a reference to the
map will show thatthisiscorrect,forI recollectthatthe
streetsin which the sewerswere repairedabout February
last,were Brewer Street,LittlePulteney Street,and Dean
Street,Soho. Many of the non-medical publicwere dis
posed to attributethe outbreak of cholerato the supposed
existenceof a pitin which persons dying of the plague
had been buried about two centuriesago ; and, if the
allegedplague-pithad been nearer to Broad Street,they
would no doubt stillclingto the idea. The situationof the
supposed pit is,however, said to be LittleMarlborough
Street,just out of the area in which the chiefmortality
=====PAGE 62=====
IRRUPTION OF CHOLERA AT DEPTFORD. 55
occurred.With regard to effluviafrom the sewers passing
intothe streetsand houses,thatisa faultcommon to most
partsof London and othertowns. There isnothing pecu
liarin the sewers or drainageof the limitedspotin which
thisoutbreak occurred; and SaffronHill and otherlocali
ties,which suffermuch more from illodours,have been
very lightlyvisitedby cholera.
Just at the time when the great outbreak of cholera
occurred in the neighbourhood of Broad Street,Golden
Square, therewas an equallyviolentirruptionin Dept-
ford,but of a more limitedextent. About ninety deaths
took place in a few days,amongst two or three scoreof
small houses,in the north end of New Streetand an ad
joiningrow calledFrench's Fields. Deptford issupplied
with very good water from the riverRavensbourne by the
Kent Water Works, and until thisoutbreak there was
but littlecholerain the town, except amongst some poor
people,who had no water except what they got by pails-
fulfrom Deptford Creek— an inletof the Thames, There
had, however, been a few cases in and near New Street,
just before the great outbreak. On going to the spoton
September 12th and making inquiry,I found that the
houses in which the deaths had occurred were supplied
by the Kent Water Works, and the inhabitantsnever
used any other water. The people informed me, how
ever, that for some few weeks the water had been ex
tremely offensivewhen firstturned on ; they saiditsmelt
like a cesspool,and frothed likesoap suds. They were
in the habitof throwing away a few pailsfulof thatwhich
firstcame in,and collectingsome foruse afterit became
clear. On inquiringin the surrounding streets,to which
thisoutbreak of choleradid not extend,viz.,Wellington
Street,Old King Street,and Hughes's Fields,I found
that there had been no alterationin the water. I con
=====PAGE 63=====
56 IRRUPTION OF CHOLERA AT DEPTFORD.
eluded,therefore,thata leakage had taken placeinto the.
pipes supplying the placeswhere the outbreak occurred,
during the intervalswhen the water was not turned on.
Gas is known to get intothe water-pipesoccasionallyin
thismanner, when they are partiallyempty, and to im
part itstasteto the water. There are no sewers in New
.Street or French's Fields,and the refuse of all kinds
consequentlysaturatesthe ground in which the pipesare
laid. I found that the water collectedby the people,
afterthrowing away the firstportion,stillcontainedmore
organicmatter than thatsuppliedto the adjoiningstreets.
On adding nitrateof silverand exposing the specimens
to the light,a deeper tintof brown was developed in the
former than in the lattter.
All the instancesof communication of cholerathrough
the medium of water,above related,have resultedfrom
the contaminationof a pump-well, or some other limited
supply of water ; and the outbreaksof choleraconnected
with the contamination,though sudden and intense,have
been limitedalso; but when the water of a riverbecomes
infectedwith the cholera evacuations emptied from on
board ship,or passingdown drainsand sewers,the com
munication of the disease,though generallylesssudden
and violent,is much more widely extended ; more espe
ciallywhen the river water is distributedby the steam
engine and pipes connected with water-works. Cholera
may linger in the courts and alleyscrowded with the
poor,for reasons previouslypointed out,but I know of
no instancein which ithas been generallyspread through
a town or neighbourhood, amongst allclassesof the com
munity, in which the drinking water has not been the
medium of itsdiffusion.Each epidemic of cholera in
London has borne a strictrelationto the nature of the
=====PAGE 64=====
THE EPIDEMIC OF 1832. 57
water-supplyof itsdifferentdistricts,being modifiedonly
by poverty, and the crowding and want of cleanliness
which always attendit.
The followingtableshows the number of deathsfrom
cholerain the variousdistrictsof London in 1832, toge
therwith the nature of the water supply at thatperiod.
(See next page.)*
This table shows that in the greater part of South-
wark, which was supplied with worse water than any
other part of the metropolis,the mortalityfrom cholera
was also much higher than anywhere else. The other
south districts,supplied with water obtained at points
higher up the Thames, and containingconsequentlyless
impurity,were lessaffected.On the north of the Thames,
the east districts,supplied,in 1832, with water from the
river Lea, at Old Ford, where it contained the sewage
of a large population,sufferedmore than otherparts on
the north side of London. Whitechapel sufferedmore
than the othereastdistricts; probably not more from the
poverty and crowded stateof the population,than from
the great number of mariners,coalheavers,and others,
livingthere,who were employed on the Thames, and got
theirwater,whilstat work, directfrom the river. There
were one hundred and thirty-ninedeaths from cholera
amongst persons afloaton the Thames. The cholera
passed very lightlyover most of the districtssupplied by
the New River Company. St.Giles'was an exception,
owing to the overcrowding of the common lodging-houses
in the part of the parishcalledthe Rookery. The City
of London alsosufferedseverelyin 1832, Now when the
engine at Broken Wharf was employed to draw water
from theThames, thiswaterwas suppliedmore particularly
* The deaths areobtainedfrom the " FirstReport of the Metropolitan
SanitaryCommission", 1847 ; and the water-supply,chieflyfrom a work
entitled" Hydraulia",by William Matthews, 1835.
=====PAGE 65=====
TABLEII.
Districts.
St.GeorgetheMartyr,Southwark
St.Olave's,Southwark
St.Saviour's,SouthwarkChristchurch,Southwark
Lambeth.
NewingtonCamberwellBermondseyRotherhithe
BethnalGreen
St.George-in-the-East
PoplarStepney
Whitechapel*
Population.77,728 127327,2.
11,022211122,7111227222033,230,02272,2222222
Deaths
from
Cholera.
2. 2 117 00 107 210 12 170121107 32 170
DeathsfromCholerain10,000liying.
110 0 3 12 17 70 11
27"1
11
12-12
22 22-
} 1 } {
WaterSupply.
SouthwarkWaterWorks,fromThamesatLondonBridge.Nofilterorsettling
reservoir.
ChieflybyLambethWaterWorks,fromThamesoppositeHungerfordMarket.No
filterorsettlingreservoir.
ChieflybySouthLondonWaterWorks,fromThamesatVauxhallBridge.Re
servoirs.Nofilter.
SouthLondonWaterWorks,andTidal
Ditches.
EastLondonWaterWorks,fromtidalpart
ofriverLeaatOldFord.
=====PAGE 66=====
NewRiverCompany,fromvarioussprings,andriverLeainHertfordshire;andoccasionallyfromThamesatBrokenWharf,
nearBlackfriar'sBridge.
NewRiverandEastLondonWaterCom ChelseaWaterWorks,fromThamesatChel
sea.Reservoirsandniters.
ChelseaWaterWorksandGrandJunctionWaterWorks,alsosupplyingwaterfromThamesatChelsea,andhavingsettlingWestMiddlesexWaterWorks,fromThames
atHammersmith.Settlingreservoirs.WestMiddlesex,NewRiver,andHamp-
steadWaterWorks.
■2JI
panies.
121f
17J3{
reservoirs.
3- 0 2 10 2 — 0
17J
2J 221
0| »
|
2 228 12 3 22 — 13 17 2 27 10 71 12 31 111
17,222220727,1217,122,722Noreturn.12,222,2177,122.,221.,232210272,13012210210222
Clerkenwell
St.Giles. Holborn. Islington.
LondonCity
EastandWestLondon
St.Luke's
Strand
Hackney. Shoreditch
Westminster
St.George,HanoverSquare
Kensington
St.Marylebone.
St.Pancraa
AsmallpartoftheWhitechapelDistrictissuppliedwithNewEiverwater.
=====PAGE 67=====
60 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1849.
to the City,and not at allto the higher districtssupplied
by the New River Company. This would offeran expla
nation of the high mortalityfrom cholerain the City at
thattime,supposing the engine were actuallyused during
1832 ; hut I have not yet been able to ascertainthatcir
cumstance with certainty. I know, however, that it was
stillused occasionallysome years later.
Westminster sufferedmore in 1832 than St. George,
Hanover Square, and Kensington, which at thattime had
the same water. This arosefrom the poor and crowded state
of part of itspopulation. The number of casesof cholera
communicated by the water would be the same in one dis
trictas in the other; but in one districtthe diseasewould
spread alsofrom person to person more than in the others.
Between 1832 and 1849 many changes took place in
the water-supply of London. The Southwark Water
Company unitedwith the South London Water Company,
toform a new Company under the name of the Southwark
and Vauxhall Company. The water works at London
Bridge were abolished,and the united company derived
theirsupply from the Thames at BatterseaFields,about
half-a-mileabove Vauxhall Bridge. The Lambeth Water
Company continued to obtain their supply opposite to
Hungerford Market ; but they had establisheda small
reservoirat Brixton.
But whilst thesechanges had been made by the water
companies,changes stillgreaterhad taken place in the
river,partly from the increaseof population,but much
more from the abolitionof cesspoolsand the almostuni
versaladoptionofwaterclosetsin theirstead.The Thames
in 1849 was more impure at BatterseaFieldsthan ithad
been in 1832 at London Bridge. A clause which pre
vented the South London Water Company from laying
theirpipeswithin two milesof the Lambeth Water Works
was repealed in 1834, and the two Companies were in
=====PAGE 68=====
THE EPIDEMIC OF 1849. 61
activecompetitionfor many years,the resultof which is,
thatthe pipes of the Lambeth Water Company and those
of the Southwark and Vauxhall Company pass together
down allthe streetsof severalof the south districts.. As
the water of both theseCompanies was nearly equal in
itsimpurity in 1849, thiscircumstancewas of but little
consequence at thattime ; but itwillbe shown furtheron
thatitafterwardsled to very importantresults.
On the north sideof the Thames the Water Companies
and theirdistrictsremained the same,but some alterations
were made in the sourcesof supply. The East London
Water Company ceased to obtainwater at Old Ford, and
got it from the riverLea, above Lea Bridge, out of the
influenceof the tide and free from sewage, except that
from some part of Upper Clapton. The Grand Junction
Company removed theirworks from Chelsea to Brentford,
where they formed large settlingreservoirs.The New
River Company entirelyceasedtoemploy the steam-engine
forobtainingwater from the Thames. The supply of the
otherWater Companies remained the same as in 1832.
The accompanying table(No. 3), shows the mortality
from cholerain the variousregistrationdistrictsof London
in 1849, together with the water supply. The annual
value of house and shop-room for each person is also
shown, as a criterion,to a great extent,of the stateof
overcrowding or the reverse. The deaths from cholera
and the value of house-room, are taken from the " Report
on the Cholera of 1849," by Dr. Farr, of the General
Register Office. The water supply is indicated merely
by the name of the Companies. After the explanation
given above of the source of supply, thiswill be suffi-,
cient. It is only necessaryto add, thatthe Kent Water
Company derive their supply from the river Ravens-
bourne, and the Hampstead Company from springsand
reservoirsat Hampstead.
=====PAGE 69=====
TABLEIII,
ShowingthemortalityfromCholera,andtheWaterSupply,intheDistrictsofLondon,in1849.
TheDistrictsarearrangedintheorderoftheirMortalityfromCholera.
AnnualvalueofHouse&Shoproomtoeach
WaterSupply.
SouthwarkandVauxhallWaterWorks,KentWaterWorks,andTidalDitches.
SouthwarkandVauxhall.
SouthwarkandVauxhall,Lambeth.
SouthwarkandVauxhall.SouthwarkandVauxhall.
SouthwarkandVauxhall,Lambeth.SouthwarkandVauxhall,Lambeth.
|Pump-wells,SouthwarkandVauxhall,
CriverWandle.
SouthwarkandVauxhall,Lambeth.
NewRiver.EastLondon.
NewRiver,EastLondon.
Kent.
EastLondon.
Chelsea.
EastLondon.
per.nin£, 1.2121.221.231.0772.231.7221.321.221.2027.1211.201.1011.1727.121.321.32
DeathsbyCholera
to10■00
inhabits.
02 3121213111110 13 27 2820727271. 2
DeathsCholera.22 222272from 21220723 21 20112272272273 13117202
Populationinthemiddle 171021217220,2312,231512722074
12,7.221221,71122,2222712101,1322,22111,1012,10272,220
of1849.
St.Olave,SouthwarkSt.George,SouthwarkSt.Saviour,Southwark
Lambeth....
Wandsworth..
Poplar....
District.
RotherhitheBermondseyNewingtonCamberwellWestLondonBethnalGreen.
ShoreditehGreenwich
WestminsterWhitechapel
=====PAGE 70=====
NewRiver..EastLondon.
Chelsea.
NewRiver.EastLondon.NewRiver.NewRiver.NewRiver.NewRiver.NewRiver.
"WestMiddlesex,Chelsea,GrandJunction.
Kent.
Chelsea.
NewRiver,EastLondon.
NewRiver.
(NewRiver,Hampstead,WestMiddle-
tsex.
NewRiver...
WestMiddlesex.
GrandJunction,NewRiver.
GrandJunction.
Hampstead,WestMiddlesex.
GrandJunction.
2.221.1121.2101.2211.7217.27211.2117.1712.221.7112.070
1.2.
2.2721.372.1211.2711.327.22212.2222.222.2812.721
—
2 171212123 172 2 2 3 1022223 3 122 2 2 2 2 0
2320.732122073 322131 22 28133237 12 1212227 2 2 22 1137
21,022102,222221721212217,122,22.,271112112,312121102211212217,232,1027,7220,13221223228032221112711,272121282128122
Kensington(exceptPadding-)
ton)....5
St.Giles....Stepney....Chelsea....
EastLondon
St.George's,East
LondonCity
St.Martin....
StrandHolborn....St.Luke.... Lewisham....Belgrave....Hackney....Islington....
St.PancrasClerkenwellMarylebone
St.James,Westminster
PaddingtonHampstead
HanoverSquare&MayFair
London....
=====PAGE 71=====
64 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1849.
A glance at the table shows that in every districtto
which the supply of the Southwark and Vauxhall, or the
Lambeth Water Company extends,the cholerawas more
fatalthan in any otherdistrictwhatever. The only other
water company derivinga supply from the Thames, in a
situationwhere itismuch contaminatedwith thecontentsof
the sewers,was the ChelseaCompany. But thiscompany,
which suppliessome of the most fashionablepartsof Lon
don,took greatpains to filterthewater beforeitsdistribu
tion,and in so doing no doubt separated,amongst other
matters,the greaterportionof thatwhich causescholera.
On the otherhand, although the Southwark and Vauxhall
and the Lambeth Water Companies professedto filterthe
water,they supplieditin a most impure condition. Even
in the following year, when Dr. Hassall made an ex
aminationof it,he found in it the hairs of animals and
numerous substanceswhich had passed through the ali
mentary canal. Speaking of the water supply of London
generally,Dr. Hassallsays:—
" It willbe observed,that the water of the companies
on the Surrey sideof London, viz.,the Southwark, Vaux
hall,and Lambeth, is by far the worst of allthosewho
take theirsupply from the Thames."*
In the north districtsof London, which sufferedmuch
lessfrom cholera than the south districts,the mortality
was chieflyinfluencedby the povertyand crowding of the
population. The New River Company having entirely
leftoff the use of theirengine in the city,theirwater,
being entirelyfreefrom sewage, could have had no share
in the propagation of cholera. It is probable also,that
the water of the East London Company, obtained above
Lea Bridge,had no sharein propagatingthe malady; and
* A MicroscopicExamination of the Water suppliedto London. Lon
don : 1850.
=====PAGE 72=====
THE EPIDEMIC OF 1849. 65
that thisis true also of the West Middlesex Company,
obtainingtheirsupply from the Thames atHammersmith;
and of the Grand Junction Company, obtaining their
supply at Brentford. All theseWater Companies have
large settlingreservoirs.It is probable also,as I stated
above, that the Chelsea Company in 1849, by careful
nitrationand by detainingthe water in theirreservoirs,
rendered itin a greatdegree innocuous.
Some partsof London sufferedby the contaminationof
the pump-wells in 1849, and the cholera in the districts
near the river was increased by the practice,amongst -
thosewho are occupied on the Thames, of obtainingwater
to drink by dipping a pailinto it. It will be shown fur
ther on, that personsoccupied on the riversufferedmore
from cholerathan others. Dr. Baly makes the following
inquiryin his Report to the College of Physicians*
" How did ithappen, if the characterof the water has
a great influenceon the mortalityfrom cholera,that in
the Belgrave districtonly 28 persons in 10,000 died,and
in the Westminster district,alsosupplied by the Chelsea
Company, 68 persons in 10,000 ; and, again,that in the
Wandsworth districtthe mortalitywas only 100, and in
the districtof St.Olave 181 in 10,000 inhabitants— both
thesedistrictsreceivingtheirsupply from the Southwark
Company ?"
The water of the Chelsea Company has been alluded
to above, but whether thiswater had any share in the
propagationof cholera or not, it is perfectlyin accord
ance with the mode of communication of the disease
* P. 207. In the tableat page 206,Dr. Baly has fallenintothe mis
take of supposingthatthe Lambeth Water Company obtainedtheirsupply
from Thames Ditton in 1849. It was not till1852 thattheirworks were
removed to thatplace. Dr.Baly has alsomistaken the name and identity
of allthe three Companies which supplythe south districtsof London
withwater.
F
=====PAGE 73=====
66 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1849.
which I am advocating,thatitshould spread more in the
crowded habitationsof the poor,in Westminster, than in
the commodious houses of the Belgrave district.In ex
amining the effectof pollutedwater as a medium of the
cholerapoison,it isnecessaryto bear constantlyin mind
the more directway in which the poisonisalsoswallowed,
as I explained in the commencement of thiswork. As
regards St.Olave'sand Wandsworth, Dr. Baly was appa
rentlynot aware that,whilst almost every house in the
firstof these districtsissupplied by the water company,
and has no othersupply,the pipesof the company extend
to only a part of the Wandsworth district,a largepart of
ithaving only pump-wells.
The epidemic of 1849 was a continuance or revivalof
thatwhich commenced in the autumn of 1848, and there
are some circumstances connected with the firstcases
which are very remarkable, and well worthy of notice.
It has been alreadystated(page 3) that the firstcaseof
decided Asiatic cholera in London, in the autumn of
1848, was that of a seaman from Hamburgh, and that
the next caseoccurred in the very room in which the first
patientdied. These casesoccurredin Horsleydown, close
to the Thames. In the evening of the day on which the
second case occurred in Horsleydown, a man was taken
illin Lower Fore Street,Lambeth, and died on the fol
lowing morning. At the same time thatthiscaseoccurred
in Lambeth, the firstof a seriesof cases occurred in
White Hart Court, Duke Street,Chelsea,near the river.
A day or two afterwards,there was a case at 3, Harp
Court, FleetStreet. The next caseoccurred on October
2nd, on board the hulk Justitia,lying offWoolwich ; and
the next to thisin Lower Fore Street,Lambeth, three
doors from where a previous case had occurred. The
firstthirteencaseswere allsituatedin the localitiesjust
=====PAGE 74=====
THE EPIDEMIC OF 1849. 67
mentioned ; and on October 5th therewere two casesin
Spitalfields.
Now, the people in Lower Fore Street,Lambeth, ob
tained theirwater by dipping a pail into the Thames,
there being no other supply in the street. In White
Hart Court, Chelsea,the inhabitantsobtained water for
allpurposes in a similarway. A well was afterwardssunk
in the court; but at the time these cases occurred the
people had no othermeans of obtainingwater,as I ascer
tained by inquiryon the spot. The inhabitantsof Harp
Court,Fleet Street,were in the habit,at thattime,of pro
curingwater from St.Bride'spump, which was afterwards
closedon the representationof Mr. Hutchinson, surgeon,
of Farringdon Street,in consequence of itshaving been
found that the well had a communication with the Fleet
Ditch sewer, up which the tide flows from the Thames.
I was informed-by Mr. Dabbs, thatthe hulk Justitiawas
suppliedwith spring-waterfrom the Woolwich Arsenal ;
but itisnot improbable thatwater was occasionallytaken
from the Thames alongside,as was constantlythe practice
in some of the other hulks, and amongst the shipping
generally.
When theepidemicrevivedagainiuthesummer of 1849,
the firstcase in the sub-district" Lambeth ; Church, 1st
part,"was in Lower Fore Street,on June 27th ; and on
the commencement of the epidemic of the present year,
the firstcaseof cholerain any part of Lambeth, and one
of the earliestin London, occurred at 52, Upper Fore
Street,where alsothe people had no water except what
they obtained from the Thames with a pail,as I ascer
tainedby callingat the house. Many of the earliercases
thisyear occurred in persons employed amongst the ship
ping in the river,and the earliestcasesin Wandsworth
and Batterseahave generallybeen amongst personsgetting
f2
=====PAGE 75=====
68 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1853,
water directfrom the Thames, or from streamsup which
the Thames flowswith the tide. It isquitein accordance
with what might be expected from the propagation of
cholerathrough the medium of the Thames water,thatit
should generallyaffectthose who draw it directlyfrom
the river somewhat sooner than those who receive it
by the more circuitousroute of the pipes of a water
company.
London was without cholera from the latterpart of
1849 to August 1853. During thisintervalan important
change had taken placein the water supply of severalof
the south districtsof London. The Lambeth Company
removed theirwater works, in 1852, from oppositeHun-
gerfordMarket toThames Ditton; thusobtaininga supply
of water quite free from the sewage of London. The
districtssuppliedby the Lambeth Company are,however,
also supplied,to a certainextent,by the Southwark and
Vauxhall Company, the pipes of both companies going
down every street,in the places where the supply is
mixed, as was previouslystated. In consequence of this
intermixingof the water supply,the effectof the altera
tion made by the Lambeth Company on the progress of
cholera was not so evident,to a cursory observer,as it
would otherwise have been. It attractedthe attention,
however, of the Registrar-General,who publisheda table
in the "Weekly Return of Births and Deaths" for 26th
November 1853, of which the followingis an abstract,
containingas much as applies to the south districtsof
London.
=====PAGE 76=====
IN LONDON. G9
TABLE IV.
Water Companies.
(1)Lambeth and
(2) Southwark
and Vauxhall .
Southwark
Vauxhall
and
(1) Southwark
and Vauxhall,
(2)Kent
SourcesofSupply.
Thames, at Thames
Dittonand atBat-
tersea.
Thames, at Batter-
sea
Thames, at Batter-
sea; the Ravens-
bourne,in Kent,&
ditchesand wells.
AggregateofDistricts
suppliedchieflyby the
respectiveCompanies.
Popula
tion.
346,363
118,267
17,805
Deathsby
Cholerain
13wks.end
ingNov.19.
211
111
19
IIsi
61
94
107
It thus appears that the districtspartiallysupplied with
the improved water suffered much less than the others,
although, in 1849, when the Lambeth Company obtained
their supply opposite Hungerford Market, these same
districtssuffered quite as much as those supplied entirely
by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, as was shown
in table in, p. 62. The Lambeth water extends to only a
small portion of some of the districtsnecessarilyincluded
in the group supplied by both Companies ; and when the
division is made a littlemore in detail,by taking sub-
districtsinstead of districts,the effectof the new water
supply is shown to be greater than appears in the above
table. The Kent Water Company was introduced into
the table by the Registrar-General on account of itssup
plying a small part of Rotherhithe. The following inte
resting remarks appeared, respecting this portion of
Rotherhithe, in the "Weekly Return" of December 10,
1853 :—
" London Water Supply. — The following is an extract
=====PAGE 77=====
70 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1853.
from a letterwhich the Registrar-General has received
from Mr. Pitt,the Registrarof Rotherhithe:—
" 'I considerMr. Morris's descriptionof the part of
the parish through which the pipes of the Kent Water
Company were laid in 1849, is in the main correct; for
though the Company had entered the parish,the water
was but partiallytaken by the inhabitantsup to the time
of the fearfulvisitationin the above year.
" 'With respectto the deaths in 1849, they were cer
tainlymore numerous in the districtnow generallysup
pliedby the Kent Company than in any otherpart of the
parish. I only need mention CharlotteRow, Ram Alley,
and Silver Street,— places where the scourge fellwith
tremendous severity.
" 'Among the recent cases of cholera,not one has
occurred in the districtsupplied by the Kent Water
Company.
* 'The parish of Rotherhithehas been badly supplied
with water formany ages past. The people drank from
old wells,old pumps, open ditches,and the muddy stream
of the Thames.'
" In 1848-9 the mortalityfrom cholera in Rotherhithe
was higher than itwas in any other districtof London.
This is quite in conformity with the general rule,that
when cholera prevails,it is most fatalwhere the waters
are most impure."
The followingtable(which, with a littlealterationin
the arrangement,is taken from the "Weekly Return of
Births and Deaths" for 31st December 1853) shows the
mortalityfrom cholera,in the epidemic of 1853, down to
a period when the diseasehad almost disappeared.
The districtsarearranged in the orderof theirmortality
from Cholera.
=====PAGE 78=====
TABLE V. 71
pi *!
Districts. Population
in 1653 2 » 5 «2 • Water Supply.
(estimated).5 P a ~ t*
Bis
Bermondsey 48,128 73 150 South wark & Vauxhall.
S.Saviour,South- )
wark . . ) 35,731 52 146 ( Southwark and Vaux-
\ hall,Lambeth.
S. George, South- )
wark . . ) 51,824 74 143 | Southwark and Vaux-
( hall,Lambeth.
St.Olave . 19,375 26 134 Southwark & Vauxhall.
Rotherhithe 17,805 20 112 South. & Vaux., Kent.
Whitechapel 79,759 78 95 East London.
Newington . 64,816 37 57 ( Southwark and Vaux-
( hall,Lambeth.
Kensington,— ex- )
ceptPaddington J 73 fiHQ 40 53 | West Middlesex,Chel-
( sea,Grand Junction.
1 tty\Jifi7
Wandsworth 50,764 26 51 ( South. & Vaux., Pump
( wells,River Wandle.
St. George (East) 48,376 21 43 East London.
Camberwell 54,667 22 40 ( Southwark and Vaux-
( hall,Lambeth.
Stepney 110,775 40 34 East London.
Lambeth 139,325 48 34 Lambeth, Sou.& Vaux.
Greenwich . 99,365 32 31 Kent.
Marylebone 157,696 48 30 West Middlesex.
Westminster 65,609 19 27 Chelsea.
St. James, West- )
minster . . J 36,406 9 25 ( Grand Junction, New
( River.
Hackney 58,429 13 22 New Riv.,East London.
Paddington 46,305 10 22 Grand Junction.
Shoreditch . 109,257 23 21 New Riv.,East London.
Bethnal Green . 90,193 18 20 East London.
Poplar 47,162 9 17 East London.
West London 28,840 4 14 New River.
Hanover Square )
and May Fair . j 33,196 5 12 Grand Junction.
Islington 95,329 12 12 New River.
Chelsea 56,538 6 11 Chelsea.
East London 44,406 4 9 New River.
London City 55,932 5 9 New River.
Clerkenwell 64,778 5 8 New River.
Belgrave 40,034 3 7 Chelsea.
St.Martin-in-the-)
Fields . .] 24,640 1 5 New River.
St.Pancras 166,956 8 5 ( New River,Hampstead,
( West Middlesex.
St.Luke . 54,055 2 4 New River.
Lewisham . 34,835 1 3 Kent.
Holborn 46,571 1 2 New River.
St.Giles . 54,214 1 2 New River.
Strand 44,460 — New River.
Hampstead 11,986 — — Hampst.,West Midsex.
2,362,236 796 —
=====PAGE 79=====
72 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1853,
It will be observed that Lambeth, which is supplied
with water in a great measure by the Lambeth Company,
occupiesa lower positionin the above tablethan itdid in
the previoustableshowing the mortalityin 1849. Rother-
hithe also has been removed from the firstto the fifth
place; owing, no doubt, to the portion of the district
suppliedwith water from the Kent Water Works, instead
of the ditches,being altogetherfree from the disease,as
was noticedabove.
As the Registrar-Generalpublished a listof all the
deaths from cholerawhich occurred in London in 1853,
from the commencement of the epidemic in August to its
conclusionin January 1854, I have been able to add up
the number which occurredin the varioussub-districtson
the south sideof the Thames, to which the water supply
of the Southwark and Vauxhall, and the Lambeth Com
panies,extends. I have presentedthem inthe tableoppo
site,arranged in threegroups.
Besidesthe generalresultshown in the table,thereare
some particularfactswell worthy of consideration.In
1849,when the water of the Lambeth Company was quite
as impure as that of the Southwark and Vauxhall Com
pany, the parishof Christchurchsuffereda ratherhigher
rateof mortalityfrom cholerathan the adjoiningparishof
St. Saviour; but in 1853, whilst the mortalityin St.
Saviour'swas at the rate of two hundred and twenty-
seven to one hundred thousand living,that of Christ-
church was only at the rate of forty-three.Now St.
Saviour'sis supplied with water entirelyby the South
wark and Vauxhall Company, and Christchurchischiefly
supplied by the Lambeth Company. The pipes and
otherproperty of the Lambeth Company, in the parishof
Christchurch,are rated at about £316, whilst the pro
perty of the Southwark and Vauxhall Company in this
=====PAGE 80=====
IN LONDON. 73
TABLE VI.
9a
Sub-Districts. Popula
tionin
1|s
■sSs Water Supply.
1851. *i cao
11©
St.Saviour,South wark 19,709 45 227
St. Olave . 8,015 19 237
St.John, Horsleydown 11,360 7 61
St.James, Bermondsey 18,899 21 111
St.Mary Magdalen . 13,934 27 193
Leather Market 15,295 23 153 Southwark and
Rotherhithe* 17,805 20 112 Vauxhall Water
Wandsworth 9,611 3 31 Company only.
Battersea . 10,560 11 104
Putney 5,280 —
Camberwell 17,742 9 50
Peckham . 19,444 7 36
Christchurch,Southwk. 16,022 7 43
Kent Road 18,126 37 204
Borough Road . 15,862 26 163
London Road 17,836 9 50
Trinity,Newington . 20,922 11 52
St. Peter,Walworth . 29,861 23 77
St.Mary, Newington . 14,033 5 35 Lambeth Water
Waterloo (1stpart) . 14,088 1 7 Company, and
Waterloo (2nd part) . 18,348 7 38 Southwark and
Lambeth Church (1st Vauxhall Com
part 18,409 9 48 pany.
Lambeth Church (2nd
part) 26,784 11 41
Kennington (1stpart) 24,261 12 49
Kennington (2nd part) 18,848 6 31
Brixton 14,610 2 13
Clapham . 16,290 10 61
St.George,Camberwell 15,849 6 37
Norwood
Streatham .
Dulwich
3,977
9,023
1,632
—
— Lambeth Water
Company only.
First 12 sub-districts. 167,654 192 114 Southwk.&Vaux.
Both Companies.
Lambeth Comp.
Next 16 sub-districts. 301,149 182 60
Last 3 sub-districts . 14,632 — —
A partof Eotherhithewas suppliedby the Kent Water Company ;
but therewas no cholerain thispart.
=====PAGE 81=====
74 THE NEW WATER SUPPLY
parishisonly rated at about £108. Waterloo Road, 1st
part, sufferedalmost as much as St.Saviour'sin 1849,
and had but a singledeath in 1853 ; itissuppliedalmost
exclusivelyby the Lambeth Company. The sub-districts
of Kent Road and Borough Road, which sufferedseverely
from cholera,are supplied,through a great part of their
extent,exclusivelyby the Southwark and Vauxhall Com
pany ; the supply of the Lambeth Company being inter
mingled with that of the other only in a part of these
districts,as may be seen by consultingthe accompanying
map (No. 2). The rural districtsof Wandsworth and
Peckham containa number of pump-wells, and are only
partiallysuppliedby theWater Company ; on thisaccount
they suffereda lower mortalitythan the othersub-districts
supplied with the water from BatterseaFields. In the
three sub-districtsto which thiswater does not extend,
therewas no death from cholerain 1853.
Although the factsshown in the above table afford
very strongevidenceof the powerful influencewhich the
drinking of water containingthe sewage of a town exerts
over the spread of cholera,when that diseaseispresent,
yet the questiondoes not end here ; for the intermixing
of the water supplyof the Southwark and Vauxhall Com
pany with thatof the Lambeth Company, over an exten
sivepart of London, admitted of the subjectbeing sifted
in such a way as to yield the most incontrovertibleproof
on one sideor the other. In the sub-districtsenumerated
in the above tableas being supplied by both Companies,
the mixing of the supply is of the most intimatekind.
The pipes of each Company go down allthe streets,and
into nearly allthe courtsand alleys. A few houses are
suppliedby one Company and a few by the other,accord
ing to the decisionof the owner or occupierat that time
=====PAGE 82=====
OF THE LAMBETH COMPANY. 75
when the Water Companies were in activecompetition.
In many casesa singlehouse has a supply differentfrom
that on eitherside. Each Company suppliesboth rich
and poor,both largehouses and small; thereisno differ
ence eitherin the conditionor occupation of the persons
receivingthe water of the differentCompanies. Now it
must be evident that,ifthe diminutionof cholera,in the
districtspartly supplied with the improved water, de
pended on thissupply,the houses receivingitwould be
the houses enjoying the whole benefitof the diminution
of the malady, whilstthe houses suppliedwith the water
from BatterseaFieldswould sufferthe same mortalityas
they would if the improved supply did not existat all.
As thereisno differencewhatever,eitherin the houses or
the people receivingthe supply of the two 4Water Com
panies,or in any of the physicalconditionswith which
they are surrounded, it is obvious that no experiment
could have been devised which would more thoroughly
testthe effectof water supply on the progressof cholera
than this,which circumstancesplaced ready made before
the observer.
The experiment,too,was on the grandest scale. No
fewer than threehundred thousand people of both sexes,
of everyage and occupation,and of everyrank and station,
from gentlefolksdown to thevery poor,were dividedinto
two groups without theirchoice,and, in most cases,with
out theirknowledge ; one group being suppliedwith water
containingthe sewage of London, and, amongst it,what
ever might have come from the cholerapatients,the other
group having water quitefreefrom such impurity.
To turn thisgrand experiment to account,allthatwas
requiredwas to learn the supply of water to each indi
vidualhouse where a fatalattackof choleramight occur.
I regretthat,in the short days at the latterpart of last
=====PAGE 83=====
76 EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
year,I could not sparethe time to make the inquiry;and,
indeed,I was not fullyaware, at that time, of the very
intimatemixture of the supply of the two Water Com
panies,and the consequentlyimportantnature of the de
siredinquiry.
When the cholerareturned to London in July of the
present year, however, I resolved to spare no exertion
which might he necessaryto ascertainthe exact effectof
the water supply on the progressof the epidemic,in the
placeswhere allthe circumstanceswere sohappilyadapted
forthe inquiry. I was desirousof making the investiga
tionmyself,in order that I might have the most satisfac
tory proof of the truthor fallacyof the doctrinewhich I
had heen advocatingforfiveyears. I had no reasonto
doubt the correctnessof the conclusionsI had drawn from
the greatnumber of factsalreadyin my possession,but I
feltthat the circumstanceof the cholera-poisonpassing
down the sewers intoa greatriver,and being distributed
through miles of pipes,and yet producing its specific
effects,was a factof so startlinga nature,and of so vast
importance to the community, that it could not be too
rigidlyexamined, or establishedon too firm a basis.
I accordinglyasked permissionat the General Register
Officeto be suppliedwith the addressesof personsdying
of cholera,in thosedistrictswhere the supply of the two
Companies is intermingledin the manner I have stated
above. Some of these addresseswere published in the
" Weekly Returns," and I was kindly permitted to take
a copy of others. I commenced my inquiry about the
middle of August with two sub-districtsof Lambeth,
called Kennington, firstpart, and Kennington, second
part. There were forty-fourdeaths in thesesub-districts
down to 12th August, and I found thatthirty-eightof the
houses in which thesedeathsoccurredwere suppliedwith
=====PAGE 84=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 77
water by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, four
houses were suppliedby the Lambeth Company, and two
had pump-wells on the premises and no supply from
either.of the Companies.
As soon as I had ascertainedthese particularsI com
municated them to Dr. Farr, who was much struckwith
the result,and at his suggestionthe Registrarsof allthe
south districtsof London were requestedto make a return
of the water supply of the house in which the attack,took
place,in allcasesof death from cholera. This order was
to take place afterthe 26th August, and I resolved to
carry my inquiry down to that date,so that the facts
might be ascertainedforthe whole courseof the epidemic.
I pursued my inquiry over the variousothersub-districts
of Lambeth, Southwark, and Newington, where thesupply
of the two Water Companies is intermixed,with a result
very similarto thatalreadygiven,as will be seen further
on. In caseswhere personshad been removed to a work
house or any other place,afterthe attackof cholera had
commenced, I inquired the water supply of the house
where the individualswere livingwhen the attacktook
place.
The inquirywas necessarilyattendedwith a good deal
of trouble. There were very few instancesin which I
could at once get the informationI required. Even when
the water-ratesare paid by the residents,they can seldom
remember the name of the Water Company tillthey have
looked for the receipt. In the case of working people
who pay weekly rents,the ratesare invariablypaid by
the landlord or his agent,who often livesat a distance,
and the residentsknow nothing about the matter. It
would, indeed, have been almost impossible for me to
complete the inquiry,ifI had not found thatI could dis
tinguish the water of the two companies with perfect
=====PAGE 85=====
78 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
certaintyby a chemical test. The testI employed was
founded on the greatdifferencein the quantityof chloride
of sodium containedin the two kinds of water,at the time
I made the inquiry. On adding solutionof nitrateof
silverto a gallonof the water of the Lambeth Company,
obtained at Thames Ditton, beyond the reach of the
sewage of London, only 2428 grains of chlorideof silver
were obtained,indicatingthe presence of *95 grains of
chlorideof sodium in the water. On treatingthe water of
the Southwark and Vauxhall Company in the same man
ner,91 grainsofchlorideof silverwere obtained,showing
the presence of 37*9 grains of common saltper gallon.
Indeed, the differencein appearance on adding nitrateof
silverto the two kinds of water was so great,that they
could be at once distinguishedwithout any furthertrou
ble. Therefore when the residentcould not give clear
and conclusiveevidence about the Water Company, I ob
tained some of the water in a small phial,and wrote the
address on the cover, when I could examine it after
coming home. The mere appearance of the water gene
rallyaffordeda very good indicationof itssource,espe
ciallyif it was observed as it came in, before it had
entered the water-buttor cistern; and the time of its
coming in also affordedsome evidence of the kind of
water,afterI had ascertainedthe hours when the turn
cocks of both Companies visitedany street. These points
were, however, not relied on, except as corroborating
more decisiveproof, such as the chemical test,or the
Company's receiptforthe rates.
A return had been made to Parliament of the entire
number of houses supplied with water by each of the
Water Companies, but as the number of houses which
they supplied in particulardistrictswas not stated,I
found thatitwould be necessaryto carrymy inquiryinto
=====PAGE 86=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 79
allthe districtsto which the supply of eitherCompany
extends,in order to show the fullbearing of the facts
brought out in those districtswhere the supply is inter
mingled. I inquiredmyself respectingevery death from
cholerain the districtsto which the supply of the Lam
beth Company extends, and I was fortunateenough to
obtainthe assistanceof a medical man, Mr. John Joseph
Whiting, L.A.C., to make inquiry in Bermondsey, B,o-
therhithe,4Wandsworth, and certainother districts,which
are supplied only by the Southwark and Vauxhall Com
pany. Mr. Whiting took greatpainswith hispart of the
inquiry,which was to ascertainwhether the houses in
which the fatalattackstook place were suppliedwith the
Company's water, or from a pump-well, or some other
source.
Mr. Whiting's part of the investigationextended over
the firstfour weeks of the epidemic,from 8th July to 5th
August ; and as inquirywas made respectingevery death
from choleraduring thispart of the epidemic,in allthe
districtsto which the supply of eitherof the Water Com
paniesextends,itmay be well toconsiderthisperiodfirst.
There were three hundred and thirty-fourdeaths from
cholerain these four weeks, in the districtsto which the
water supply of the Southwark and Vauxhall and the
Lambeth Company extends. Of theseitwas ascertained,
thatin two hundred and eighty-sixcasesthe house where
the fatalattackof cholera took place was suppliedwith
water by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, and in
only fourteencaseswas the house suppliedwith the Lam
beth Company's water ; in twenty-two cases the water
was obtained by dipping a pail directlyintothe Thames,
in four instancesitwas obtainedfrom pump-wells,in four
instancesfrom ditches,and in four casesthe source of
supply was not ascertained,owing to the person being
=====PAGE 87=====
80 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
taken illwhilsttravelling,or from some similarcause.
The particularsof allthe deaths which were caused by
cholerain the firstfour weeks of the lateepidemic,were
published by the Registrar- General in the " Weekly
Returns of Births and Deaths in London," and I have
had the threehundred and thirty-fourabove enumerated
reprintedin an appendix to thisedition,as a guarantee
thatthe water supply was inquiredinto,and to affordany
person who wishes it an opportunityof verifyingthe re
sult. Any one who should make the inquiry must be
carefulto find the house where the attacktook place,for
in many streetsthere are severalhouses having the same
number.
According to a returnwhich was made to Parliament,
the Southwark and Vauxhall Company supplied 40,046
houses from January 1stto December 31st,1853, and the
Lambeth Company supplied 26,107 houses during the
same period; consequently,as 286 fatalattacksof cholera
took place,in the firstfour weeks of the epidemic,in
houses supplied by the former Company, and only 14
in houses supplied by the latter,the proportionof fatal
attacksto each 10,000 houses was as follows. Southwark
and Vauxhall 71. Lambeth 5. The cholerawas there
forefourteentimesas fatalat thisperiod,amongst persons
having the impure water of the Southwark and Vauxhall
Company, as amongst those having the purer water from
Thames Ditton.
It isextremely worthy of remark, thatwhilstonly five
hundred and sixty-threedeaths from choleraoccurred in
thewhole of the metropolis,in the four weeks ending 5th
August, more than one half of them took place amongst
the customers of the Southwark and Vauxhall Company,
and a greatportionof the remaining deaths were thoseof
marinersand persons employed amongst the shipping in
=====PAGE 88=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 81
the Thames, who almost invariablydraw their drinking
water directfrom the river.
It may, indeed, be confidentlyasserted,that if the
Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company had been able
to use the same expeditionas the Lambeth Company in
completing their new works, and obtaining water free
from the contentsof sewers,the lateepidemic of cholera
would have been confinedin a great measure to persons
employed among the shipping,and to poor people who
get water by pailsfuldirect from the Thames or tidal
ditches.
The number of houses in London at the time of the last
censuswas 327,391. If the houses supplied with water
by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, and the deaths
from choleraoccurringin these houses,be deducted,we
shallhave in the remainder of London 287,345 houses,in
which 277 deathsfrom choleratook placein the firstfour
weeks of the epidemic. This isat the rateof nine deaths
to each 10,000. But the houses suppliedwith water by
the Lambeth Company only suffereda mortalityof five
in each 10,000 at thisperiod; itfollows,therefore,that
thesehouses,although intimatelymixed with thoseof the
Southwark and Vauxhall Company, in which so great a
proportionalmortalityoccurred, did not suffereven so
much as the restof London which was not so situated.
In the beginning of the lateepidemic of cholera in
London, the Thames water seems to have been the great
means of its diffusion,eitherthrough the pipes of the
Southwark and Vauxhall Company, or more directlyby
dipping a pail in the river. Cholera was prevailingin
the Baltic Fleet in the early part of summer, and the
followingpassage from the " Weekly Returns" of the
Registrar-Generalshows that the diseasewas probably
imported thence to the Thames.
G
=====PAGE 89=====
82 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
" Bermondsey, St.James. At 10, Marine Street,on
25th July,a mate mariner,aged 34 years,Asiaticcholera
101 hours, afterpremonitory diarrhoea16£ hours. The
medical attendant states: 'This patient was the chief
mate to a steam-vesseltaking storesto and bringinghome
invalidsfrom the Baltic Fleet. Three weeks ago he
brought home in his cabin the soiledlinenof an officer
who had been ill.The linenwas washed and returned.'"
The time when thissteam-vesselarrivedin the Thames
with the soiledlinenon board, was a few days beforethe
firstcasesof cholera appeared in London, and thesefirst
cases were chieflyamongst persons connected with the
shippingin the river. It isnot improbable thereforethat
a few simple precautions,with respectto the communica
tionswith the Baltic Fleet,might have saved London
from the cholera thisyear, or at all events greatlyre
tarded itsappearance.
As the epidemic advanced, the disproportionbetween
the number of casesin houses suppliedby the Southwark
and Vauxhall Company and those supplied by the Lam
beth Company, became not quite so great,although it
continued very striking. In the beginning of the epide
mic the casesappear to have been almost altogetherpro
duced through the agency of the Thames water obtained
amongst the sewers; and the small number of cases
occurring in houses not so supplied,might be accounted
forby the factof personsnot keeping always athome and
taking alltheirmeals in the houses in which they live;
but as the epidemic advanced itwould necessarilyspread
amongst the customers of the Lambeth Company, as in
partsof London where the water was not in fault,by all
the usualmeans of itscommunication. The two subjoined
tables,vn and viii,show the number of fatalattacksin
houses suppliedrespectivelyby the two Companies, in all
=====PAGE 90=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 83
the sub-districtstowhich theirwater extends. The cases
in table vn, are again included in the larger number
which appear in the next table. The sub-districtsare
arranged in threegroups, as they were in tablevi,illus
tratingthe epidemic of 1853.
In tableViiI,showing the mortalityin the firstseven
weeks of the epidemic,the water supply is the resultof
my own personal inquiry,in every case,in allthe sub-
districtsto which the supply of the Lambeth Company
extends; but in some of the sub-districtssupplied only
by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, the inquiryof
Mr. Whiting having extended only to 5th August, the
water supply of the lastthreeweeks iscalculatedto have
been in the same proportionby the Company, or by pump
wells,etc.,as in the firstfour weeks,— a calculationwhich
is perfectlyfair,and must be very near the truth. The
sub-districtsin which the supply is partly founded on
computation,are marked with an asterisk.
The numbers in tableviiidiffera very littlefrom those
of the tableI communicated to the Medical Times and
Gazetteof 7th October, on account of the water supply
having sincebeen ascertainedin some casesin which I
did not then know it. The smallnumber of instancesin
which the water supply remains unascertainedare chiefly
those of persons taken into a workhouse without their
addressbeing known.
g2
=====PAGE 91=====
84 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
TABLE VII.
The mortalityfrom Cholera in the fourweeks
ending 5th August.
<D a Water Supply.■3e
O^ to
<3
- -*3
Popula
m as c*3
Sub-Districts. tionin
3 S§
fc*3 •3 If — U9
,C
1851. Is % a > 2 So * a Ss aQ.2.9 m> H s P
St.Saviour,Southward 19,709 26 24 — 2 —
St.Olave,Southwark 8,015 19 15 — 2 2
St.John, Horsleydown 11,360 18 17 — 1 —
St.James, Bermondsey 18,899 29 23 — 6 —
St.Mary Magdalen 13,934 20 19 — 1 —
Leather Market 15,295 23 23 — — —
Rotherhithe 17,805 26 17 — 9 —
Battersea . 10,560 13 10 — 1 2 —
Wandsworth 9,611 2 — — 2 —
Putney 5,280 1 — 1 — —
Camberwell 17,742 19 19 — — —
Peckham . 19,444 4 4 — —
Christchurch,Southwk. 16,022 3 2 1
Kent Road 18,126 8 7 1 — — —
Borough Road . 15,862 21 20 1 — — —
London Road 17,836 9 5 4 — — —
Trinity,Newington 20,922 14 14 — — — —
St.Peter,Walworth 29,861 20 20 — — — —
St.Mary, Newington 14,033 5 5 — — — —
Waterloo Road (1st) 14,088 5 5 — — — —
Waterloo Road (2nd) 18,348 5 5 — — — —
Lambeth Church (lsi 18,409 5 2 1 — 1 1
Lambeth Church (2nd; 26,784 10 7 2 — — 1
Kennington (1st) 24,261 11 9 1 1 — —
Kennington (2nd) 18,848 3 3 — — — —
Brixton 14,610 1 — 1 — — —
Clapham . 16,290 5 4 — 1 — —
St.George,Camberwel 15,849 9 7 2 — — —
Norwood . 3,977
Streatham . 9,023
Dulwich 1,632
Sydenham 4,501
486,936 334 286 14 4 26 4
=====PAGE 92=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 85
TABLE VIII.
Mortalityfrom Cholera in the seven weeks
ending 26th August.
111
Water Supply.
Popula a Sja ■8 o
CO a
Sub-Districts. tion in
1851.
£ 18 M S3
is el 3g3
5js a Q
1
CO
B 2o *
aj
O.S5 as a
1-1 0
*St.Saviour,Southwar]t 19,709 125 115 __ 10 .,
*St. Olave, South wark 8,015 53 43 _ 5 5
*St. John, Horsleydowii 11,360 51 48 3
*St.James, Bermondsej r 18,899 123 102 — 21 —
*St. Mary Magdalen . 13,934 87 83 — 4 —
*Leather Market . 15,295 81 81 — —
*Rotherhithe . 17,805 103 68 — 35
*Battersea . . 10,560 54 42 4 8
Wandsworth 9,611 11 1 — 2 8
Putney 5,280 1 — — 1 —
*Camberwell 17,742 96 96 — — — —
*Peckham . 19,444 59 59 — — — —
Christchurch,South wlc. 16,022 25 11 13 1
Kent Road 18,126 57 52 5 —
Borough Road . 15,862 71 61 7 — — 3
London Road 17,836 29 21 8 — —
Trinity,Newington 20,922 58 52 6 — — —
St.Peter, Walworth 29,861 90 84 4 — 2
St.Mary, Newington 14,033 21 19 1 1 —
Waterloo Road (1st) 14,088 10 9 1
Waterloo Road (2nd) 18,348 36 25 8 1 2
Lambeth Church (1st] 18,409 18 6 9 — 1 2
Lambeth Church (2nd; 26,748 53 34 13 1 — 5
Kennington (1st) 24,261 71 63 5 3
Kennington (2nd) 18,848 38 34 3 1 —
Brixton 14,610 9 5 2 2
*Clapham . 16,290 24 19 — 5
St.George,Camberwell 15,849 42 30 9 2 — 1
Norwood . 3,977 8 2 1 5
Streatham . 9,023 6 1 5 — .
Dulwich 1,632 — .
Sydenham . 4,501 4 — 1 2 — 1
486,936 1514 1263 98 29 102 22
=====PAGE 93=====
86 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
The followingis the proportion of deaths to 10,000
houses,during the firstseven weeks of the epidemic, in
the populationsupplied by the Southwark and Vauxhall
Company, in thatsuppliedby the Lambeth Company, and
in the restof London.
TABLE IX.
Kumber
of houses.
Deaths Deaths in
from each 10,000
Cholera. houses.
Southwark and Vauxhall Company
Lambeth Company ....
Rest of London ....
40,046 1,263 315
3726,107 98
256,423 1,422 59
The mortalityin the houses suppliedby the Southwark
and Vauxhall Company was thereforebetween eightand
nine times as greatas in the houses suppliedby the Lam
beth Company ; and it will be remarked that the cus
tomers of the Lambeth Company continued to enjoy an
immunity from cholera greaterthan the rest of London
which is not mixed up as they are with the houses sup
pliedby the Southwark and Vauxhall Company.
As regards the period of the epidemic subsequent to
the 26th August to which my inquiryextended, I have
statedthat the RegistrarGeneral requested the District
Registrarsto make a return of the water supply of the
house of attackin allcasesof death from cholera. Owing
to difficultiessuch as I explainedthat I had met with in
the beginning of my inquiry,the Registrarscould not
make the return in allcases,and as they could not be
expected to seek out the landlordor hisagent,or toapply
chemical teststo the water as I had done, the water
supply remained unascertainedin a number of cases,but
=====PAGE 94=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 87
the numbers may undoubtedly be consideredto show the
correctproportionsas faras they extend,and they agree
entirelywith the resultsof my inquiry respecting the
earlierpartof the epidemic given above.
The RegistrarGeneral published the returns of the
water supply,which he had obtained from the District
Registrars,down to 14th October,,in a table which is
subjoined. As the whole of the south districtsof London
were included in the inquiryof the Registrar General,
the deaths in the Greenwich and Le wisham districts,
which are suppliedby the Kent Water Company, and did
not enterintomy inquiry,are included in the table,but
they do not in the leastaffectthenumbers connectedwith
the othercompanies.
TABLE X.
Deaths
Water Supply.
from
Week ending Cholera. Southwk. Pumps,
aud other
sources.
Not
ascer
tained.and
Vauxhall.
,Lambeth. Kent
Company.
September 2 . 670 399 45 38 72 116
9. 972 580 72 45 62 213
„ 16. 856 524 66 48 44 174
„ 23. 724 432 72 28 62 130
„ 30. 383 228 25 , 19 24 87
October 7 . 200 121 14 10 9 46
„ 14. 113 69 8 3 6 29
3920 2353 302 191 279 795
Now 2,353 deaths in 40,046 houses,the number sup
plied by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, are 537
deaths to each 10,000 houses ; and 302 deathsto £6,107,
the number of houses suppliedby the Lambeth Company,
are 115 deaths to each 10,000 houses; consequently,in
=====PAGE 95=====
88 THE EPIDEMIC OF 1854,
the second seven weeks of the epidemic,the population
supplied by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company con
tinued to suffernearly fivetimes the mortality of that
supplied with water by the Lambeth Company. If the
795 deathsin which the water supply was not ascertained
be distributedequallyover the other sourcesof supply in
the above table(No. x),the deaths in houses suppliedby
the Southwark and Vauxhall Company would be 2,830,
and in houses supplied by the Lambeth Company would
be 363. By adding the number of deaths which oc
curred in the firstseven weeks of the epidemic, we get
the numbers in the subjoined table (No. xi),where the
populationof the houses supplied by the two water com
paniesisthatestimatedby the RegistrarGeneral.*
TABLE XI.
Deathsby
Cholerain
14wks.end-
ingOct-14.
Deaths
Population in10,000
in 1851. living.
London ..... 2,362,236 10,367 43
West Districts .... 376,427 1,992 53
North Districts .... 490,396 735 14
Central Districts .... 393,256 612 15
East Districts .... 485,522 1,461 30
South Districts .... 616,635 5,567 90
Houses supplied by Southwark and
Vauxhall Company 266,516 4,093 153
Houses supplied by Lambeth Corn-
173,748 461 26
We see by the above tablethat the houses supplied
with the water from Thames Ditton, by the Lambeth
* Weekly Return,Oct.14,p.433.
=====PAGE 96=====
IN THE SOUTH DISTRICTS OF LONDON. 89
Company, continued throughout the epidemic to enjoy
an immunity from cholera,not only greaterthan London
at large,but greaterthan every group of districts,except
the north and centralgroups.
In the next table(No. xn), the mortalityfrom cholera
in 1849 isshown side by side with that of 1854, in the
varioussub-districtsto which the supply of the two water
companies with which we are particularlyinterestedex
tends. The mortalityof 1854 is down to October 21,
and isextractedfrom a tablepublished in the " Weekly
Return of Births and Deaths" of October 28; that of
1849 isfrom the " Report on Cholera" by Dr. Farr, pre
viouslyquoted. The sub-districtsare arranged in three
groups as before,the firstgroup being supplied only by
the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, the second group
by thisCompany and the Lambeth, and the third group
by the Lambeth Company only. It is necessaryto ob
serve,however, thatthe supply of the Lambeth Company
has been extended to Streatham,Norwood, and Syden
ham, since 1849, in which year these places were not
supplied by any water company. The situationand
extent of the various sub-districtsare shown, together
with the nature of the water supply, in Map 2, which
accompanies thiswork.
The table exhibitsan increaseof mortalityin 1854 as
compared with 1849, in the sub-districtssupplied by the
Southwark and Vauxhall Company only,whilstthereisa
considerablediminutionof mortalityin the sub-districts
partly supplied by the Lambeth Company. In certain
sub-districts,where I know thatthe supply of the Lambeth
Water Company is more general than elsewhere, as
Christchurch, London Road, Waterloo Road 1st, and
Lambeth Church 1st,the decreaseof mortalityin 1854 as
compared with 1849 is greatest,as might be expected.
=====PAGE 97=====
90 THE CHOLERA OF 1849 COMPARED
TABLE XII.
Deaths Deaths
from from
Sub-Districts. Cholera Cholera Water Supply.
in 1849. in 1S54.
St.Saviour,Southwark . 283 371
St. Olave 157 161
St.John, Horsleydown . 192 148
St.James, Bermondsey . 249 362
St.Mary Magdalen 259 244
Leather Market 226 237
Rotherhithe* 352 282 Southwark & Vaux-
Wandsworth . 97 59 hallCompany only.
Battersea 111 171
Putney .... 8 9
Camberwell . 235 240
Feckham 92 174
Christchurch,Southwark 256 113
Kent Road . 267 174
Borough Road 312 270
London Boad 257 93
Trinity,Newington 318 210
St.Peter,Walworth 446 388 Lambeth Company,St. Mary, Newington 143 92 and Southwark andWaterloo Road (1st) 193 58 Vauxhall Compy.Waterloo Road (2nd) . 243 117
Lambeth Church (1st) . 215 49
Lambeth Church (2nd) . 544 193
Bennington (1st) . 187 303
Kennington (2nd) 153 142
Brixton 81 48
Clapham 114 165
St. George, Camberwell 176 132
Norwood 2 10
Streatham 154 15 Lambeth Company
Lulwich 1 — only.
Sydenham 5 12
First 12 sub-districts
Next 16 sub-districts
Last 4 sub-districts
2261 2458 Southwk. & Vauxhall.
Both Companies.
Lambeth Company.
3905 2547
162 37
A smallpartof Botherhitheisnow suppliedby the Kent Water
Company.
=====PAGE 98=====
WITH THAT OF 1854. 91
Waterloo Road 1st,which sufferedbut littlefrom cholera
in the present year, is chieflycomposed of very dirty
narrow streets,in the neighbourhood of Cornwall Road
and the New Cut, inhabitedby very poor people; and
Lambeth Church 1st,which sufferedstillless,containsa
number of skinyards and other factories,between Lam
beth Palace and Vauxhall Bridge, which have oftenbeen
inveighed againstas promoting the cholera. The high
mortalityof the Streatham districtin 1849 was caused by
the outbreak of cholera in Drouett'sAsylum for pauper
children,previouslymentioned.
Whilst making inquiriesin the south districtsof Lon
don, I learned some circumstanceswith respect to the
workhouses which deserveto be noticed. In Newington
Workhouse, containing650 inmates,and supplied with
the water from Thames Ditton, there had been but two
deaths from cholera amongst the inmates down to 21st
September, when the epidemic had already greatly de
clined. In Lambeth Workhouse, containing,if I re
member rightly,nearly 1,000 inmates, and suppliedwith
the same water,therehad been but one death amongst the
inmates when I was therein the firstweek of September.
In St. Saviour's workhouse, which is situatedin the
parishof Christchurch,and issuppliedwith water by the
Lambeth Company, no inmate died of cholera before I
calledin the firstweek of September. On the otherhand,
in the workhouse of St.George, Southwark, suppliedwith
the water of the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, six
inmates died out of about 600 before the 26th August,
when the epidemic had only run one-thirdof itscourse.
The mortalitywas alsohigh amongst the inmates of St.
Olave'sWorkhouse, supplied with water by the South
wark and Vauxhall Company, but I do not know the
number who died. I trust,however, that the Registrar
=====PAGE 99=====
92 HORSEMONGER LANE GAOL.
General,in giving an account of the recentepidemic,will
make a return of the deaths amongst the inmates of the
various -workhousesand other institutionson the south
sideof the Thames, togetherwith the water supply of the
buildings. Bethlehem Hospital, the Queen's Prison,
Horsemonger Lane Gaol, and some other institutions,
having deep wellson the premises,scarcelysufferedat all
from cholerain 1849, and there was no death in any of
them during the part of the recentepidemic to which my
inquiry extended.
On the north side of the Thames the mortalityduring
the recentepidemic seems to have been influencedmore
by the relativecrowding and want of cleanlyhabitsof the
people,and by the accidentalcontaminationof the pump-
wells,than by the supply of the water companies. The
water of the New River Company could have no sharein
the propagation of cholera,as I explainedwhen treating
of the epidemic of 1849 ; and the extensivedistrictssup
plied by thiscompany have been very slightlyvisitedby
the disease,except in certainspotswhich were influenced
by the causes above mentioned. The water of the East
London Company isalsofreefrom the contentsof sewers,
unless it be those from the neighbourhood of Upper
Clapton,where there has been very littlecholera. The
districtssupplied by this company have been lightly
visited,except such as lienear the Thames, and are inha
bited by mariners,coal and ballast-heavers,and others,
who are employed on theriver. Even Bethnal Green and
Spitalfields,so notoriousfor theirpoverty and squalor,
have suffereda mortalitymuch below the average of the
metropolis. The Grand Junction Company obtaintheir
supply at Brentford,within the reach of the tideand near
a large population,but they detain the water in large
reservoirs,and theirofficerstellme they filterit; at all
=====PAGE 100=====
DISTRICT OF CHELSEA WATER COMPANY. 93
events,they supply it in as pure a stateas that of the
Lambeth Company obtainedat Thames Ditton,and their
districtshave sufferedvery littlefrom choleraexceptat the
spotwhere the irruptionoccurred from the contamination
of the pump-well in Broad Street,Golden Square. The
West Middlesex Company, obtainingtheirsupply from
the Thames at Hammersmith, have alsovery largereser
voirs,and the districtsthey supply have sufferedbut little
from cholera,except the Kensington brick fields,Starch
Green, and certainother spots,crowded with poor people,
chieflyIrish.
The districtssupplied by the Chelsea Company have
suffereda much greatermortality,during the recentepi
demic, than the average of the whole metropolis,as the
subjoined table (No. xin) shows. But the mortalityin
thesedistrictsisonly half as greatas in the houses sup
plied by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, who
obtain theirsupply from the Thames just opposite the
spot where the Chelsea Company obtain theirs. The
lattercompany, however, by detainingthe water in their
reservoirs,and by filteringit,are enabled to distributeit
in a stateof comparativepurity; but I had ample oppor
tunitiesof observing,in August and September last,that
thiswas farfrom being the stateof the water suppliedby
the Southwark and Vauxhall Company. Many of the
people receivingthislattersupply were in the habit of
tying a pieceof linenor some otherfabricover the tap by
which the water entered the butt or cistern,and in two
hours, as the water came in,about a tablespoonof dirt
was collected,allin motion with a varietyof water insects,
whilstthe strainedwater was far from being clear. The
contentsof the strainerwere shown to me in scoresof in
stances. I do not,of course,attributethe choleraeither
to the insectsor the visibledirt; but itisextremely pro
bable thatthe measures adopted by the Chelsea Company
=====PAGE 101=====
04 CHOLERA IN THE DISTRICT
'tofreethe water from these repulsiveingredients,either
separatedor caused the destructionof the morbid matter
of cholera. It is very likely that the detentionof the
water in the company's reservoirspermitted the decom
positionof the cholera poison, and was more beneficial
than the filtering,for the followingreasons. The water
used in Millbank Prison, obtained from the Thames at
Millbank,was filteredthrough sand and charcoaltillit
looked as clearas thatof the Chelsea Company ; yet, in
every epidemic, the inmates of thisprisonsufferedmuch
more from cholerathan the inhabitantsof the neighbour
ing streetsand thoseof TothillFieldsPrison,suppliedby
thatcompany.* In the earlypart of August last,the use
TABLE XIII.
Deaths by Cholera
Population
in 1851. In 15 wks. To every
10,000
living.
ending
October 21.
Chelsea,south .... 19,050
17,669
19,819
40,034
34,295
31,314
122
99
71
238
173
238
64
56
36
59
50
76
Chelsea,north-west
Chelsea,north-east
Belgrave .....
St.John, Westminster
St.Margaret, Westminster
Total of districtssupplied by the
Chelsea Water Company
Houses supplied by the Southwark
162,181 941 56
and Vauxhall Company 266,516
2,362,236
2,900
10,530
108
London, except the houses supplied
by the Chelsea Company, and by
the Southwark & Vauxhall Compy.
45
1,933,539 6,689 34
* In 1849,therewere forty-eightdeathsfrom cholerainMillbankprison,
amounting to 43 per cent,of the averagenumber of prisoners. In Tot
hillFieldsprison there were thirteendeaths among eighthundred pri.
soners,or 16 per cent. The otherprisonson the north sideoftheThames
are suppliedeitherby the New River Company, or from pump-wells,and
therewas but one death from cholerain allof them ;thatdeathtook place
in Newgate.
=====PAGE 102=====
OF THE CHELSEA WATER COMPANY. 95
of the Thames water was entirelydiscontinuedin Millbank
Prison, and water from the Artesian well in Trafalgar
Square was used instead,on the recommendation of Dr.
Baly, the physicianto the prison. In threeor four days
afterthischange, the cholera,which was prevailingto an
alarming extent,entirelyceased.
The quantity of impurity in the Thames was greatly
increasedduring the lateautumn, by the long course of
dry weather. From 5th August to 12th September, a
period of more than fiveweeks, only 0429 of an inch of
rain fellat Greenwich, as appears by the report of the
Astronomer Royal. The stream of the Thames above the
reach of the tide became so slender,that itwas difficult
to navigate barges above Richmond. The Thames' in
London isa very largebody of water,and ifthe whole of
itflowed away into the sea every day, the liquid which
flowsdown the sewers in twelve hours would form but a
very smallpart of it; but itmust be remembered thatthe
quantityof water which passesout to sea,with the ebb of
every tide,is only equal to that which flows over Ted-
dington Lock, and from a few smalltributarystreams. In
hot dry weather thisquantityis moreover greatlydimi
nished by the evaporationtaking placefrom the immense
surfaceof water exposed between Richmond and Graves-
end, so thatthe riverbecomes a kind of prolonged lake,
the same water passing twice a day to and fro through
London, and receivingthe excrement of itstwo millions
and more of inhabitants,which keeps accumulating till
thereisa fallof rain. In time of cholera,the evacuations
of the patientskeep accumulating in the riveralong with
the other impurities; and it is probably in thisway that
the dry weather with a high barometer aidsin promoting
cholera,as ithas oftenbeen observed to do.
I thought atfirstthatthe quantityof common salt,pre
=====PAGE 103=====
96 IMPURITY OF THE THAMES.
viouslymentioned as being present in the water of the
Southwark and Vauxhall Company, consistedentirelyof
the saltwhich had passed down the sewers intothe river,
forI had no idea thatany admixture of sea water reached
as high as BatterseaFields. Mr. Quick, the engineerof
the above Company, informed me, however, that an im
pregnation of saltwater does extend as far aftera long
course of dry weather. It is obvious that a dry season,
whilstitincreasesthe quantityof impurityin the Thames,
must alsocause the sea water to flow furtherinlandthan
at other times. I did not examine the water of the
Thames in August or September,but I have done so now,
at the latterpartof November, and I am inclinedto think
that even yet a slightadmixture of sea water may reach
to BatterseaFieldswith every tide. I found 5*8 grainsof
chlorideofsodium per galloninwater obtainedat Hunger-
ford Market, at half-flowof the tide,on 19th November,
and 19'1 grainsper gallon,in water obtainedat the same
place,on 27th November, at an hour and a half before
high water ; whilstwater obtainedat London Bridge, on
28th November, at high water,contained6343 grains per
gallon.
A specimen of water obtained on 21st November, from
a house supplied by the Southwark and Vauxhall Com
pany, contained28'8 grainsof common saltper gallon,or
about three-quartersas much as itcontained in Septem
ber,when the quantitywas 379 grains. It isvery ob
viousfrom the above analyses,that the Water Company
obtain theirsupply from the Thames at high water,or
nearlyso,although thisis the time of the tidewhen the
water containsthe greatestamount of impurity. It is
quitecertainthat the sea water cannot reach to Thames
Ditton, any more than the contents of the London
sewers, and therefore,whatever may be itssource,the
=====PAGE 104=====
ALLEGED EFFECT OF LEVEL. 97
quantityof chlorideof sodium in the water isquitecon
clusiveas regardsthe purpose forwhich I examined into
it,viz.,to distinguishbetween the water of the two Com
panies.
When the water of the Southwark and Vauxhall Com
pany was examined by Messrs. Graham, Miller, and
Hofmann,' at the latterpart of January 1851, it con
tained only 1499 grains of chlorideof sodium, or about
one-twentiethas much as itcontainedlastSeptember, and
one-fifteenthas much as on 21st November 1854.*
Dr. Farr discovereda remarkable coincidencebetween
the mortalityfrom cholera in the differentdistrictsof
London in 1849, and the elevationof the ground ; the
connectionbeing of an inverse kind, the higher districts
sufferingleast,'and the lowest sufferingmost from this
malady. Dr. Farr was inclinedto think thatthe levelof
the soilhad some directinfluenceover the prevalenceof
cholera,but the factof the most elevatedtowns in this
kingdom, as Wolverhampton, Dowlais, Merthyr Tydvil,
and Newcastle-upon-Tyne, having suffered excessively
from thisdiseaseon severaloccasions,isopposed to this
view, as is alsothe circumstanceof Bethlehem Hospital,
the Queen's Prison,Horsemonger Lane Gaol, and several
otherlargebuildings,which are suppliedwith water from
deep wells on the premises,having nearly or altogether
escaped cholera,though situatedon a very low level,and
surrounded by the disease. The factof Brixton,at an
elevationfifty-six feet.above Trinity high-water mark,
having suffereda mortalityof 55 in 10,000,whilstmany
districtson the north of the Thames, atlessthan half the
* Eeport by the Government Commission on the Chemical Qualityof
the Supply ofWater to the Metropolis.(177.)
H
=====PAGE 105=====
98 ALLEGED EFFECT OF LEVEL.
elevation,did not sufferone-thirdas much, alsopointsto
the same conclusion.
I expressed the opinion in 1849,* that the increased
prevalenceof cholerain the low-lyingdistrictsof London
depended entirelyon the greater contamination of the
water in these districts,and the comparative immunity
from thisdiseaseof the populationreceivingthe improved
water from Thames Ditton,during the epidemics of last
year and the present,as shown in the previous pages,
entirelyconfirms thisview of the subject; for the great
bulk of thispopulationlivein the lowest districtsof the
metropolis.
The prevalence of cholerahas been very much under
the influenceof the water supply in other towns besides
London. The cholera has prevailed to a considerable
extent in the crowded habitationsof the poor in Liver
pool and some othertowns, where the general supply of
water was not in fault,but I know of no instancein which
ithas spread through allclassesof the community, except
where the generalsupply of water has been contaminated
with the contentsof the drainsand sewers; and allthe
towns with which I am acquainted that have enjoyed an
almost complete immunity from thisdisease,have a water
supply quitefreefrom any chance of contamination.Bir
mingham, Bath, Cheltenham, and Leicesterhave nearly
escaped the cholera in every epidemic. The few cases
that have occurred being chieflythoseof persons newly
arrivedfrom placeswhere the diseasewas prevailing,and
a few otherswho came in communication with them. All
thesetowns have a supply of water quite free from con
nectionwith the drains and sewers,and the small rivers
which flow through them are so impure thatitwould be
* Medical Gazette,vol.xliv,p. 749.
=====PAGE 106=====
CHOLERA IN EXETER. 99
impossibleto drink the water. Leicesteriscrowded with
a poor population,and has hardly any physicaladvantage
except itswater supply.
The firstcasesof cholerain Exeter in 1832,were three
in the same day, besidesone in St.Thomas's, a suburb of
Exeter, in a gentleman justarrived from London, where
the diseasewas prevailing. The other three were a
woman and her two children; the former, with one of
her children,had returned from Plymouth the previous
day, where she had been nursing a childthathad died of
the cholera. Within fivedays from thistime,therewere
seven freshcases in as many differentpartsof the town,
amongst personshaving no intercoursewith each otheror
the firstcases. The diseasesoon became very prevalent,
and in three months there were 1,135 cases,and 345
deaths. Exeter is situatedon ground which risesfrom
the edge of the riverto an elevationof one hundred and
fiftyfeet. In 1832 the inhabitantswere chieflysupplied
with riverwater by water-carriers,who conveyed it in
carts and pails. Dr. Shapter, from whose work* the
above particularsare obtained,kindly furnishedme with
information concerning the sewers, and with maps of
theirposition. The water-carriers,by whom Exeter was
very greatlysupplied,obtained theirwater almost exclu
sivelyfrom certainstreams of water, divertedfrom the
riverin order to turn water-mills; and one of the chief
sewers of the town, which receivessuch sewage as might
come from North Street,in which the firstcasesof cho
lera occurred, empties itselfinto the branch from the
riverwhich dividesinto the two mill-streamsjust men
tioned. It must be remarked that the parishof St.Ed
mund, in which thesestreamsof water were situated,had
a lower mortalityfrom cholera than other parts of the
* Historyofthe Cholerain Exeter in 1832.
H 2
=====PAGE 107=====
100 CHOLERA IN HULL.
town like it,densely populated and on low ground near
the river. Dr. Shapter attributesthislower rateof mor
tality,and I believerightly,to St.Edmund's being freely
intersectedby running streams of water. The people
would probably not drink more of the water than in parts
of the town where itwas lessplentiful,and had to be paid
for,but they would have much better opportunitiesfor
personal cleanliness: so that whilst they would be ex
posed to only the same number of scatteredcases,they
would be lesslikelyto have the malady spreadingthrough
families,and by personal intercourse. After the cholera
of 1832, measures were taken to afforda bettersupply of
water to Exeter ;not,so faras I can findby Dr. Shapter's
work, thatitsimpurity was complained of,but because of
itsscarcityand cost. Water-works were establishedon
the riverExe, two miles above the town, and more than
two miles above the influenceof the tide. Exeter has
sincebeen very plentifullysuppliedwith thiswater,and
Dr. Shapter informed me that in 1849 there were only
about twenty cases of cholera,nearly half of which oc
curred in strangerscoming into the town, and dying
within two or three days aftertheirarrival. This last
summer therewas only one death from cholerain Exeter.
We willnow considerthe town of Hull,in which, toge
ther with other sanitarymeasures adopted since 1832,
therehas been a new and more plentifulsupply of water,
but with a fardifferentresultto thatat Exeter. In 1832
Hull was scantilysuppliedwith water conveyed in pipes
from springs at Anlaby, three miles from the town.
About 1844,new water-works were establishedto afforda
more plentifulsupply. These works were situatedon the
river Hull, at Stoneferry,two miles and three quarters
from the confluence of that river with the Humber.
About half the sewage of the town isdeliveredinto the
=====PAGE 108=====
CHOLERA IN YORK. 101
riverof the same name, the restbeing dischargedintothe
Humber, as appears from informationand a map kindly
furnished me in 1849 by Dr. Horner of Hull, who was
making greateffortsto have betterwater obtainedforthe
town. The tide flows up the rivermany miles past the
water-Works,carryingup with itthe filthfrom the sewers.
The supply of water was, to be sure,obtained when the
tidewas down, but as the banks of the river are clothed
with sedges in many parts,and itsbottom deep with mud,
the water can never be freefrom sewage. Moreover, there
are some partsof the riverabove Stoneferrymuch deeper
than the rest,and where the deeper water is,accordingto
the testimonyof boatmen, nearly stagnant; thus allowing
the water carriedup by the tideto remain and gradually
mix with that afterwardsflowing down. There are also
boats,with familieson board, passing up the riverto the
extentof fivethousand voyages in the year. The water
when taken from the riverwas allowed to settlein the
reservoirfor twenty-fourhours,and was then said to be
filteredbeforebeing sentto the town. In 1832 the cho
lerawas confinedalmost exclusivelyto the poor,and the
deaths amounted to threehundred.
In 1849 the deaths in Hull (includingthe suburb of
Sculcoates)were 1834, although 8,000 or 10,000 leftthe
town, itissaid,to avoid the ravagesof the disease. Dr.
Horner informed me thatthe deathsoccurred amongst all
classesof the community, and that the town was much
betterdrained in 1849 than in 1832.
When the choleramade itsappearance at York, about
the middle of July 1849,itwas at firstchieflyprevalentin
some narrow streetsnear the river,called the Water
Lanes. The inhabitantsof this spot had been in the
habit,from time immemorial, of fetchingtheirwater from
the riverat a placenear which one of the chiefsewers of
=====PAGE 109=====
102 CHOLERA IN YORK.
the town empties itself;and recentlya publicnecessary
had been built,the contentsof which were washed every
morning intothe riverjust above the spot at which they
got the water. In a short time from twenty to thirty
deaths occurred in this locality; but the medical men
consideringthe impure water injurious,the people were
supplied from the water-works,with water obtainedfrom
the river at a point some distanceabove the town, and
the cholerasoon ceased nearlyaltogetherin thispart of
the city,but continued to spread in some other parts.
The cholerahaving thus abated in the Water Lanes, the
gratuitoussupply of water was cut off,and the people
went to the river as before. There were stillcases of
cholera in the town, and itsoon broke out again in this
locality,and in the firstfew days of September eight
deaths occurred among the personswho used water ob
tained directfrom the river. The tap for general use
was again opened, and the river water interdicted,and
the choleraagain ceased,and did not recur. These cir
cumstances were communicated to me by a friend on
whose accuracy I can rely.
The inhabitantsof Dumfries drink the water of the
riverNith, which flowsthrough the town, and intowhich
the sewers discharge their contents,which floatafter
wards to and frowith the tide. In 1832 therewere 418
deathsfrom choleraout of a populationof 11,606,being
at the rateof 360 in 10,000,or 1 in every 28 of the in
habitants. The cholera again visitedDumfries at the
closeof 1848, and carriedoff431 persons,or 1 in every
32, out of a population now numbering 14,000; so that
the mortalitywas excessiveon both occasions.
Preston and Oldham, in Lancashire,are suppliedwith
water from surfacedrainage on the neighbouring hills,
and there was scarcelyany cholera at either of these
=====PAGE 110=====
CHOLERA IN GLASGOW. 103
placesin 1849. The greaterpart of the town of Paisley
issuppliedin a similarway ; and I was informed thatthe
casesof cholerawhich occurred there in 1849 were con
finedto a quarter of the town to which thissupply of
water does not extend. Nottingham is supplied with
filteredwater obtained from the river Trent, some dis
tanceabove the town. In 1832 thissupply did not ex
tend to allthe inhabitants,and the cholerawas somewhat
prevalentamongst the poor, of whom itcarriedoff289 ;
the populationof the town being 53,000. After thattime
thewaterwas extended copiouslytoallthe inhabitants,and
therewere but thirteendeathsfrom the epidemic in 1849.
The localSanitaryCommittee placed the supply of water
amongst the chief causes of thisimmunity from cholera,
and I believejustly. There were but seven deathsfrom
cholerain Nottingham lastsummer.
Glasgow has been supplied,sincethe earlypart of the
present century,with the water of the Clyde, obtained a
littleway above the town, but within the influenceof the
tide,and consequently mixed with the contents of the
sewers. It isimperfectlyfilteredthrough sand. In 1847,
however, the parish of Gorbals, which forms the south
part of Glasgow, was furnishedwith a supply of water
collectedon the neighbouring hills; and Dr. Leech, of
Glasgow, speaks as followsrespectingthe influenceof this
water on the prevalence of cholera: " During the late
cholera therewas a remarkable circumstance,which de
serves notice as compared with the epidemic of 1832.
Since the former period,the populationof Glasgow, south
of the Clyde, has nearly doubled ; and with thisexcep
tion,and the introductionof the soft-watersupply, the
circumstancesmight be considered as the same at both
periods. In one district,the parishof Gorbals,the attack
in 1832 was fearful; while Glasgow, north of the Clyde,
=====PAGE 111=====
104 CHOLERA IN NEWCASTLE.
alsosufferedseverely. During the lateepidemic [thatof
1848-49],Gorbals parish furnishedcomparativelya small
number of cases; while the epidemic in other parts of
Glasgow was very severe. The unanimous opinion of the
Medical Societywas, that thiscomparativeimmunity was
to be attributedto the soft-watersupply."*
I was informed thatwhen the cholerawas prevalentin
Glasgow lastwinter,the parishof Gorbals again enjoyed
a similarimmunity from the disease.
The followingpassage respectingthe water-supplyof
Parisisfrom Dr. Farr's"Report to the Registrar-General
on the Cholera of 1848-49":—" The supply of Paris is
from various sources,but four-fifthsof the water is from
the Canal de 1'Ourque,which, by the decisionof Napo
leon,was alsoappropriatedto navigation. The water for
some years,and in 1832, when the epidemic was so fatal,
was drawn from the dirtybasin in which the boats and
barges of the canals rested; but is now drawn from the
canalbeforeitentersthe basin....The mortalityof cho
lerain Pariswas excessive,and in 1832 variedfrom 80,of
10,000 inhabitants,in the elegantChaussee d'Antin and
in Montmartre on the heights,to 530 and 520 in the low
quartiersof the Hotel de Villeand the Cite\"(p.lxxviii.)
The town of Newcastle-upon-Tyne affordsa remarkable
instanceof the influenceof the water supply on the pre
valenceof cholera. In 1831-32 therewere no waterworks
at Newcastle ; itwas supplied,in an insufficientmanner,
with springwater,which generallyhad tobe carriedsome
distanceto the houses from " pants" in the streets.The
epidemic was prettysevereat thistime. Prom November
1831 to November 1832 therewere 801 deaths from cho
leraout of a populationof 42,760. The diseaseprevailed
* Report of the General Board of Health on the Supply of Water to the
Metropolis,1850,p. 55.
=====PAGE 112=====
CHOLERA IN NEWCASTLE. 105
chieflyamongst the poor,and was worst in the leastele
vated partsof the town, near the river. Subsequently to
1832, waterworks were establishedon the riverTyne, a
littleabove the town ; but thesewere abandoned, in 1848,
in favourof a supply from a rivuletand springsatWhittle
Dean, about ten miles distant. In 1849, therewere but
295 deathsfrom cholerain a populationthen increasedto
71,847. In the beginning of July 1853,two months before
the reappearanceof cholerain England, the Whittle Dean
Water Company found theirproper sources insufficient
forthe demands of the populationand thevariousfactories,
and they made use of the former waterworks, mentioned
above,to obtainwater from the Tyne. The pointatwhich
they obtainedwater from the river,isscarcelya mile above
Newcastle,and the tideflowsforsix miles above the town,
carrying the contentsof the sewers with it. There are
alsovillages,containingseveralthousands of colliersand
ironfounders,on the banks of the Tyne, above the water
works. The water from the Tyne was mixed, without
filtration,with that from Whittle Dean, to the extent of
one-third; and the mixed water, so supplied,was dis
coloured,and containedthe largequantityof 7*1grainsof
organicmatter per gallon.
In the autumn of 1853, the cholera was prevailing
extensivelyat Hamburgh, and in nearly allthe ports of
the Baltic,whence a number of shipswere arrivingevery
day in the Tyne. The firstcasesof choleracommenced,
with diarrhoea,on the 27th and 28th August, atBellQuay,
on the banks of the Tyne, three miles below Newcastle.
One of the patientsfrom BellQuay was taken worse whilst
on a visitto her mother at Newcastle : she died on 2nd
September. Her mother was taken illthe same evening,
and died on the followingday. Other casesoccurred in
Newcastle on the 1st and 2nd of September, having no
=====PAGE 113=====
106 - CHOLERA IN NEWCASTLE.
connexion with these. A ship from Bremen was lying at
Bell Quay, oppositethe house where the firstcasesoccur
red ; but therehad been no illnesson board thisship,and
the preciseway in which the cholerawas introduced on
thisoccasion,isnot known.
The diseasesoon spread to an extent almost unprece
dented in this country : by the 15th of September the
deaths exceeded a hundred a day. In nine weeks there
were 1,533 deathsfrom cholerain a populationof 86,114,
being 178 to each 10,000 inhabitants; but the greater
number of these deaths occurred in a few days,as 1001
took placefrom the 13th to the 23rd Sept.inclusive.*
Gateshead,which is situatedoppositeto Newcastle,on
the other side of the Tyne, is supplied with the same
t water ; and in 1849 it shared with that town a compara
tiveimmunity from cholera,whilstin the autumn of 1853,
433 persons died of that diseaseout of a population of
26,000,or thereabouts,being 166 to each 10,000 inhabi
tants.
The loweststreetsinNewcastle and Gateshead areabout
fivefeet above high-water mark ; and only a few streets
are situatedat thislevel,forthe banks risevery abruptly,
at a littledistancefrom the river,on both sides. A great
portionof each town iselevatednearly200 feetabove the
river,and some parts are nearly300 feethigh ; yet the
Water Company suppliesallthesedistricts,and allwere
severelyvisitedby the cholera,which on this occasion
spared no classof the community. In the districtswhich
are most crowded, the mortalitywas greatest,the deaths
being much more numerous in the parisheswhich con
taineda great number of tenements consistingof a single
room, than in those which consistedchieflyof houses
* See Report of Commissioners on the Cholera at Newcastle, etc.,
p.474.
=====PAGE 114=====
CHOLERA IN NEWCASTLE. 107
occupied by one family.* This, however, isquite in accord
ance with the principles which I am throughout endea
vouring to explain. A great deal of stress is laid,very
properly, by the Commissioners who have reported respect
ing this outbreak, on the ill-arranged buildings, the de
fective drainage, and want of privy accommodation, in
Newcastle ; but itmust be remembered that allthese evils
existed in 1849, when Newcastle escaped with less cholera
than most towns,— to a greater extent than they did in
1853, for many improvements had taken place in the mean
time.
In consequence of a great outcry on the part of the
public, who naturally connected the great fatalityof cho
lera in some measure with the turbidity and offensive
smell of the drinking-water, the Company entirely ceased
to draw water from the Tyne on the 15th September ; and
although the Tyne water was not entirelyout of the pipes
for a day or two, the deaths, which had been rapidly
increasing, began to diminish on the 17th, and were less
ened considerably by the 20th. The following is the
course of the mortality in Newcastle, in the most fatal
part of the epidemic ; and itbegan to decline at exactly
the same time in Gateshead :
September12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Deaths...38 59 90 106 114 103 103 111 85 68 82 60.
The late General Board of Health directed one of their
medical inspectors, Dr. Waller Lewis, to make minute
inquiry as to the relative effectsproduced by the use of
pure spring water, and that of the Water Company, dur
ing the epidemic of cholera in Newcastle ; and itis much
to be regretted that the inquiry was not carried out. To
have conducted the inquiry through the whole of New
* Opus cit.,p.xxv.
=====PAGE 115=====
108 CHOLERA IN NEWCASTLE.
castleand Gateshead would not have entaileda quarteras
much labouras my investigationsin Lambeth, Newington,
and the Borough. Dr. Lewis calledon Mr. Main, the
secretaryof the Water Company, and they made an in
quiry in certainhouses,taken at random, through three
streets,and also in Greenhow Terrace, where a severe
outbreak of cholera had occurred,although it was not
supplied by the Company, but had what was reported to
be good spring water. Dr. Lewis gave up the inquiry
because he could not find two placesexactlyalikein all
theirphysicalconditions,— one placesuppliedwith spring
water,the otherby the Company. He made no reportof
what he had done ; but Mr. Main sent a paper on the
subject of this commenced inquiry to the Pathological
Societyof Newcastle,an abstractof which appeared in the
" Medical Times and Gazette".
By adding Greenhow Terrace to the streetspartlysup
pliedby the Company, and by includingcasesof cholera,
fatalor otherwise,with thoseof mere diarrhoea,Mr. Main
was able to show a result apparently in favour of the
Company's water. He was good enough, however, to send
me a copy of his paper,which containsthe detailsof the
inquiry as far as it extended ; and I found, on perusing
it,that,leavingout Greenhow Terrace,which isnot sup
pliedby the Company at all,therewas no case of cholera,
eitherfatalor otherwise,and no case,even of approaching
cholera,in any house which was not suppliedwith the
Company's water. All the deaths and all the cholera
occurred in the houses having thiswater,whilstin the
houses having only pump water,there was simply diar•
rhcea. In the workhouse, supplied by the Water Com
pany, and having fivehundred and fortyinmates,there
were twelve casesof cholera,or approaching cholera,and
seven deaths;whilstin themilitarybarracks,suppliedfrom
=====PAGE 116=====
CHOLERA AT MOSCOW. 109
wellson the premises,and having fivehundred and nine
teen inmates,although therewas a good deal of harmless
diarrhea,therewas no cholera,nor any case of approach
ing cholera.
The communication of choleraby means of the water is
well illustratedby the instanceof Moscow, which was
severelyvisitedby that diseasein 1830 ; but much less
severely'in the second epidemic. Subsequently to 1830
the greaterpartof the town, which issituatedtothe north
of the Moscow river,obtaineda supply of excellentwater,
conducted in pipes from springs at a distance; and the
cholerain 1847 was chieflyconfinedto those partsof the
town which lieto the south of the river,towhich the new
supply of water did not extend,and where the people had
stillonly impure river-waterto drink.*
The above instancesare probably sufficientto illustrate
the widely-spread influencewhich the pollutionof the
drinking water exertsin the propagationof cholera.
After the Registrar-Generalalluded,in the " Weekly
Return" of 14th October last,to the very conclusiveinves
tigationof the effectsof pollutedwater in the south dis
trictsof London, therewas a leadingarticle,in nearlyall
the medical periodicals,tfullyadmittingthe influenceof
thewater on the mortalityfrom cholera. It may therefore
be safelyconcluded that thisinfluenceisprettygenerally
admitted by the profession. It must not be disguised,
however, that medical men are not yet generallycon
vinced thatthe diseaseisactuallycommunicated from per
son to person by the morbid matter being swallowed in.
the drinking water,or otherwise. It used to be the cus
tom of medical authorsto speak of three kinds of causes
« E.port of Swedish Commissioners,quoted in the Second Report ofthe
MetropolitanSanitaryCommission, 1848.
t Medical Times and Gazette,Lancet,and AssociationJournal.
=====PAGE 117=====
110 DIFFUSION OF THE CHOLERA POISON
of a disease,viz.predisposing,exciting,and proximate
causes. The proximate causes have been given up, as
being the diseasesthemselves; but authors stilldivide
causes into predisposingand excitingones. It may be
remarked, however, that in treatingof certaincommuni
cable diseases,the cause of which is thoroughly under
stood, as syphilisand the itch,predisposingcauses are
never mentioned ; and that they are rarelyalluded to in
treatingof small-pox,measles,and scarletfever,whilst
they continue to be appealed to in explanation of the
variouscontinued fevers.*Now many medical men, whilst
they admit the influenceof pollutedwater on the preva
lence of cholera,believe that it acts by predisposingor
preparing the system to be acted on by some unknown
cause of the diseaseexistingin the atmosphere or else
where. The followingamongst otherreasonsprove,how
ever,thatopinion cannot long halt here,and that,if the
effectof contaminated water be admitted,it must lead to
the conclusion that it acts by containingthe true and
specificcause of the malady.
In my inquiriesin the south districtsof London I met
with severalinstancesin which persons,especiallymaid
servantsand young men, died of cholerawithina few days
aftercoming from the country to a house suppliedwith
water by the Southwark and Vauxhall Company. The
Registrarof Waterloo Road (2nd) remarked as followson
thispoint,on 26th August last:— " This isthe thirdsuc
cessive case of fatalcholera,where the patientshave
recentlycome from the country. Similarinstanceshave
frequentlyattractedthe Registrar'snotice." I found that
thehouses in which thesecasesoccurredwere suppliedby
* Various conditionsare requisitefor the productionof a disease,as
they are forthe productionof a crop of wheat or turnips; but it is not
necessaryto dignifytheseconditionswith the name of causes.
=====PAGE 118=====
IN WATER. Ill
the above-named Company. The outbreak of cholerain
the Balticfleet,relatedat page 36, occurred within forty-
eight hours afterthe pollutedwater had been taken on
board. And lastly,ifthe contaminatedwater merely acted
by predisposingor preparing the system to be affectedby
some other cause,itwould be impossibleto explainwhy
nearly allthe persons drinking it should be attacked to
gether,in caseswhere a pump-well or some otherlimited
supply ispolluted,while the populationaround experience
no increaseof the malady.
All the evidence proving the communication of cholera
through the medium of water, confirmsthatwith which
I setout,of itscommunication in the crowded habitations
of the poor,in coal-minesand other-places,by the hands
gettingsoiledwith the evacuationsof the patients,and by
smallquantitiesof theseevacuationsbeing swallowed with
the food,as paint is swallowed by house paintersof un
cleanlyhabits,who contractlead-colicin thisway.
There areone or two objectionstothemode ofcommuni
cationofcholerawhich I am endeavouringtoestablish,that
deserveto be noticed. Messrs.Pearse and Marston state,
in theiraccount of the cases of cholera treated at the
Newcastle Dispensary in 1853, thatone of the dispensers
drank by mistake some rice-waterevacuation without
any effectwhatever.* In rejoinderto thisnegative in
cident,it may be remarked, that severalconditionsmay
be requisiteto the communication of cholerawith which
we are as yet unacquainted. Certainconditionswe know
to be requisiteto the communication of other diseases.
Syphiliswe know is only communicable in itsprimary
stage,and vaccinelymph must be removed at a particular
time to produce itsproper effects.In the incidentabove
* Medical Times and Gazette,1854,vol.i,p. 183.
=====PAGE 119=====
112 EXPERIMENTS OF DR. THIERSCH
mentioned, the large quantity of the evacuation taken
might even prevent itsaction. It must be remembered
thatthe effectsof a morbid poison are never due to what
firstentersthe system,but to the crop or progeny pro
duced from thisduring a period of reproduction,termed
the period of incubation; and ifa whole sack of grain,or
seed of any kind, were put into a hole in the ground, it
is very doubtful whether any crop whatever would be
produced.
Dr. Thiersch is of opinion,as appears by a discussion
which has recentlytaken place at Munich, that the cho
leraevacuationsare not at firstcapable of generatingthe
disease; but that a decomposition takes place in them,
and that in from six-to nine days they become in a state
to induce cholera. He founds this opinion on experi
ments which he performed by giving small quantitiesof
the choleraevacuationstowhite mice. Although itisnot
contraryto allanalogy thatsome change or development
should take place in the cholera poison in the interval
between itsleavingone person and enteringanother,itis
most probable that the fatalbowel complaint produced
in white mice by Dr. Thiersch was not a specificdisease,
but the ordinary effectof putrifyingingesta. Many of
the best attestedinstancesof the communication of cho
leraare those,such as were relatedat the commencement
of thiswork, where the patientisattackedin from twenty-
four to forty-eighthours afterfirstbeing near another
patient,and although an intervalof a week or so,often
elapsesbetween one caseof the diseaseand thosewhich
follow,itisextremelyprobablethat,in theseinstances,the
evacuationsremain the greaterpart of thistime in a dry
stateon the soiledlinen,without undergoing any change.
An objectionthathas repeatedlybeen made to the pro
pagationof cholerathrough the medium of water,is,that
=====PAGE 120=====
ANSWERS TO CERTAIN OBJECTIONS. 113
every one who drinks of the water ought to have the dis
ease at once. This objectionarisesfrom mistaking the
department of science to which the communication of
cholera belongs,and looking on it as a questionof che
mistry,insteadof one of naturalhistory,as itundoubtedly
is. It cannot be supposed that a morbid poison,which
has the property,under suitablecircumstances,of repro
ducing itskind, should be capableof being dilutedinde
finitelyin water,likea chemicalSalt; and thereforeitisnot
to be presumed thatthe cholera-poisonwould be equally
diffusedthrough every particleof the water. The eggs
of the tape-worm must undoubtedly passdown the sewers
intothe Thames, but it by no means followsthat every
body who drinks a glassof the water should swallow one
of the eggs. As regards the morbid matter of cholera,
many other circumstances,besides the quantity of it
which is present in a river at differentperiods of the
epidemic, must influencethe chances of itsbeing swal
lowed, such as itsremaining in a butt or othervesseltill
itisdecomposed or devoured by animalcules,or itsmerely
settlingto the bottom and remaining there. In the case
of the pump-well in Broad Street,Golden Square, if the
cholera-poisonwas contained in the minute whitishfloc-
culi,visibleon closeinspectionto the naked eye, some
persons might drink of the water without taking any, as
they soon settledto the bottom of the vessel.
It isnot necessarytooppose any othertheoriesin order
to establishthe principlesI am endeavouring to explain,
for the fieldI have entered on was almost unoccupied.
The best attempt at explainingthe phenomena of cho
lera,which previouslyexisted,was probably that which
supposed that the diseasewas communicated by effluvia
given off'from the patientinto the surrounding air,and
inhaled by othersintothe lungs ; but thisview required
i
=====PAGE 121=====
114 THEORIES OF THE CAUSE OF CHOLERA.
itsadvocatesto draw very largelyon what is calledpre
disposition,in order to account for the numbers who ap
proach near to the patientwithout being affected,whilst
othersacquirethe diseasewithout any near approach. It
alsofailedentirelyto account for the sudden and violent
outbreaksof the disease,such as thatwhich occurred in
the neighbourhood of Golden Square.
Another view having a certainnumber of advocatesis,
that cholera depends on an unknown something in the
atmosphere which becomes localized,and has itseffects
increasedby the gasesgiven offfrom decomposing animal
and vegetable matters. This hypothesis is, however,
rendered impossible by the motion of the atmosphere,
and, even in the absence of wind, by the laws which
govern the diffusionof aeriform bodies; moreover, the
connection between cholera and offensiveeffluviais by
no means such as to indicatecause and effect; even in
London, as was before mentioned, many places where
offensiveeffluviaare very abundant have been visited
very lightlyby cholera,whilst the comparatively open
and cleanlydistrictsof Kennington and Clapham have
sufferedseverely. If inquiry were made, a far closer
connection would be found to exist between offensive
effluviaand the itch,than between these effluviaand
cholera; yet as the cause of itchiswell known, we arc
quite aware that thisconnectionisnot one of cause and
effect.
Mr. John Lea, of Cincinnati,has advanced what he
callsa geologicaltheory of cholera* He supposes that
the cholera-poison,which he believesto existin the air
about the sick,requires the existenceof calcareousor
magnesian saltsin the drinking-waterto give it effect
This view isnot consistentwith what we know of cholera,
* Cholera,with Eeferenceto the GeologicalTheory. Cincinnati,1850.
=====PAGE 122=====
THEORIES OF THE CAUSE OF CHOLERA. 115
but there are certaincircumstancesrelatedby Mr. Lea
which deserve attention. He says that,in the western
districtsof the United States,the cholera passed round
the arenacious,and spent itsfury on the calcareousre
gions; and that itattackedwith deadly effectthosewho
used the calcareouswater,while it passed by thosewho
used sandstone or softwater. He gives many instances
of towns sufferingseverelywhen river water was used,
whilstothers,having only softspringwater or rainwater,
escaped almost entirely; and he statesthat there has
been scarcelya case of cholera in familieswho used only
rain water. The rivers,it is evident,might be con
taminated with the evacuations,whilst it is equally evi
dent that the rainwater could not be so polluted. As
regards sand and allsandstoneformations,they are well
known to have the effectof oxidizingand thus destroying
organic matters; whilst the limestone might not have
that effect,although I have no experienceon that point.
The connection which Mr. Lea has observed between
cholera and the water is highly interesting,although it
probably admits of a very differentexplanationfrom the
one he has given.
There are certain circumstances connected with the
historyof cholerawhich admit of a satisfactoryexplana
tion aocording to the principlesexplained above, and
consequentlytend to confirm thoseprinciples. The first
point I shallnotice,viz.,the period of duration of the
epidemic in differentplaces,refersmerely to the commu-
nicabilityof the disease,without regard to the mode of
communication. The duration of cholera in a place is
usuallyin a directproportionto the number of the popu
lation. The diseaseremains but two or threeweeks in a
village,two or threemonths in a good-sizedtown,whilstin
i 2
=====PAGE 123=====
116 DURATION OF CHOLERA
a great metropolis itoften remains a whole year or longer.
I find from an analysiswhich I made in 1849 of the valu
able tabic of Dr. Wm. Merriman, of the cholera in Eng
land in 1832,* that fifty-two places are enumerated in
which the disease continued less than fiftydays, and that
the average population of these places is 6,624. Forty-
three places are likewise down in which the cholera lasted
fiftydays, but lessthan one hundred ; the average popu
lation of these is 12,624. And there are, without includ
ing London, thirty-three places in which the epidemic
continued one hundred days and upwards, the average
population of which is38,123 ; or ifLondon be included,
thirty-four places, with an average of 78,823. The fol
lowing short table will show these figuresin a more con
venient form ;
No. ofPlaces.
52
43
33)
34
DurationinDays. AveragePopulation.
0 to 50 ... 6,624
50 to 100000 ... 12,624
100 and upwards ... j 7«'823
There was a similar relationin 1849 between the dura
tion of the cholera and the population of the places which
itvisited; a relationwhich points clearly to the propaga
tion of the disease from patient to patient ; for if each
case were not connected with a previous one, but de
pended on some unknown atmospheric or telluric con
dition, there is no reason why the twenty cases which
occur in a village should not be distributed over as long
a period as the twenty hundred cases which occur in a
large town.
Even the duration of the cholera in a street,when com
pared to its duration in the individual houses, points to
the same conclusion. A table has been published! in the
* Trans, of Roy. Med. and Chir.Soc, 1844.
+ Med. Times and Gazette,Nov. 25th,1854.
=====PAGE 124=====
IN DIFFERENT PLACES. 117
reportof the latediscussionon choleraat Munich, which
shows that whilst the epidemic remained three or four
weeks in a street,it only remained six or seven days in
houses where severalpeople were attacked. Dr. Petten-
koferremarks,that" ifthe proximate cause of the disease
had been generallydiffusedover a certainnumber of
streetsor a certaindistrict,and its invasion had been
opposed by individualdispositionalone,one might have
expected that both the casesof diseaseand the instances
of death would have occurred in single houses,where
many such appeared together,at similarperiodsof time
throughout the whole street; but, supposing that the
proximate cause of the diseasewas not general,but local,
then it would act in such a manner that the period of
time within which the diseasewould show itselfin single
houses would be very differentfrom that which was
applicableto the entirestreet." The local cause in a
house we know to be the illnessof some individual,who,
in many cases,has newly arrivedfrom some placewhere
the diseasewas prevailing.
Each time when cholerahas been introducedintoEng
land in the autumn, it has made but littleprogress,and
has lingeredratherthan flourishedduring thewinter and
spring,toincreasegraduallyduring the followingsummer,
reach itsclimax at the latterpart of summer, and decline
somewhat rapidlyas the cool days of autumn set in. In
most partsof Scotland,on the contrary,cholerahas each
time run through itscourse in the winter immediately
followingitsintroduction. I have now to offerwhat I
consideran explanation,to a great extent,of these pecu
liaritiesin the progressof cholera. The English people,
as a general rule,do not .drink much unboiled water,
except in warm weather. They generallytake tea,coffee,
malt liquor,or some other artificialbeverage at their
=====PAGE 125=====
118 EFFECT OF SEASON
meals, and do not require to drink between meals, ex
cept when the weather is warm. In summer, however,
a much greater quantityof drink is required,and it is
much more usual to drink water at that season than in
cold weather. Consequently,whilstthe choleraischiefly
confined in winter to the crowded familiesof the poor,
and to the mining population,who, as was before ex
plained,eat each other'sexcrement at alltimes,itgains
accessas summer advances to the populationof thetowns,
where thereisa riverwhich receivesthe sewers and sup
pliesthe drinking water at the same time ; and, where
pump-wells and otherlimitedsuppliesof water happen to
be contaminatedwith the contentsof the drainsand cess
pools,there is a greateropportunity for the disease to
spread at a time when unboiled water is more freely
used.
In Scotland,on the otherhand, unboiled water issome
what freelyused at alltimes to mix with spirits; I am
told that when two or three people enter a tavern in
Scotlandand ask fora gillof whiskey, a jug of water and
tumbler-glassesare brought with it. Malt liquorsare
only consumed to a limitedextent in Scotland,and when
persons drink spiritwithout water, as they often do, it
occasionsthirstand obligesthem to drink water after
wards.
There may be other causes besides the above which
tend to4assistthe propagation of cholera in warm, more
than in cold weather. It is not unlikelythat insects,
especiallythe common house-flies,aid in spreading the
disease.An ingeniousfriendofmine has informed me that,
when infusionof quassiahas been placed in the room for
the purpose of poisoningflies,he has more than once per
ceivedthe tasteof iton hisbread and butter.
Dr. Farr gives the followingvery important informa
=====PAGE 126=====
ON THE PREVALENCE OF CHOLERA. 119
tionrespectingthe sex of personswho died of choleraat
differentperiodsof the epidemic*
" It isworthy of remark, thatat the beginning of the
epidemic, the deaths of males exceeded the deaths of
femalesvery considerably; the numbers in the months of
October, November, and December, 1848, were,— males
612, females493 ; or in the proportionof 100 to 80—
" As a general rule,when the mortalityfrom cholera
attaineda very high rate,the number of deaths among
femalesexceeded the deaths among males.
" In London a remarkable change was observed in the
proportionof the sexesaffectedin the courseof the epide
mic. In four weeks of October 1848, the deaths of 80
males and of 42 females by cholerawere registered; in
the thirteenlastweeks of the year the deathsof 258 males
and 210 femaleswere registered; and therewas an excess
of males atallages,but particularlyin the ten yearsof age
15-25. In the quarterending March 1849, the deaths of
males amounted to 250, of females to 266 : at the age of
25 and upwards the excessof deaths among femaleswas
considerable.In June, at the commencement of thegreat
outbreak,the males again furnishedthe most numerous
victims. At the closeof July the femalesdied in greater
numbers than the males, and continued to do so to the
end. In the week that the mortalitywas highest,the
deaths of 895 males and of 1131 femaleswere returned.
In the September quarterthe deathsof males under the
age of 25 exceeded the deaths of females; but afterthat
age the proportionswere reversed."
The greaterpart of the female populationremain almost
constantlyat home, and take theirmeals at home, whilst
a considerablenumber of the men move about in follow
ing theiroccupations,and take both food and drink at a
* Report on the Cholera of 1848-40,p. xl.
=====PAGE 127=====
120 PROPORTION OP THE SEXES
varietyof places; consequently,in the early part of an
epidemic,when the diseaseonly existsin a few spots,the
male part of the populationismost liableto come within
the operationof the morbid poison; but at a laterperiod
of the epidemic,when the choleraismore generallydif
fused,itmay reach thosewho stayat home as readilyas
thosewho move about ; and in additionto the riskwhich
the women sharewith the men, they have the additional
one of being engaged in attendingon the sick.
It isa confirmationof thisview of the matter that,when
the cholerapoison isdistributedthrough the pipesof a
Water Company, the above rule does not hold good, but
a contraryone prevails,owing, probably,to femalesbeing
lessin the habit of drinking beer than men, and being
thereforemore likelyto drink water. Of the 334 deaths
detailedin the Appendix to this work (286 of them
amongst the customers of the Southwark and Vauxhall
Water Company), only 147 were males,whilst 187 were
females. The deaths occurred in the firstfourweeks of
the recentepidemic. On the other hand, out of the 229,
deaths from cholera which occurred in all the rest of
London during thisperiod,140 were males and only 89
females. When the mortalityof the whole of the metro
polisduring thisperiod istaken together,thereisa slight
preponderance on the part of the males ; the numbers
being,— males 287, females276 : total563.
The deaths from cholera in England in 1849 were
53,293 ; of those,14,718, or 27 per cent,of the whole,
occurred in childrenunder 15 years of age. Of the 334
deathswhich are recorded in the Appendix to thiswork,
127, or 38 per cent.,are those of children under 15,
whilstof the remaining 229 which occurred in the restof
London during the firstfour weeks of the epidemic,only
61, or 26 per cent.,took place.before the age of 15,— a
=====PAGE 128=====
WHO DIE OF CHOLERA. 121
proportionnearlythe same as in the whole of England in
1849. The higher proportionof deathsamongst children
in the houses supplied with the impure water from the
Thames at BatterseaFields,probably arosefrom the cir
cumstance that childrenare very fond of drinking water
in warm weather. I oftenheard such remarks as the fol
lowing,in making my inquiriesin the south districtsof
London: — "My children.likewater betterthan tea or
anything else,I cannot keep them away from the water-
butt;" or," the child that is dead used to drink a great
deal of that water, she was big enough to reach to the
butt herself."
Dr. Guy, physician to King's College Hospital,made
a tableshowing the occupationsof 4,312 males,of fifteen
years of age and upwards, who died of cholerain London
in the epidemic of 1848-49 ; togetherwith the ratiowhich
the deaths bear to the living,as well as itcould be ascer
tainedfrom the census of 1841. I have not room forthe
whole table,but have selectedthe occupationswhich
sufferedmost, and thosewhich sufferedleast. The fol
lowing abstractof Dr. Guy's tablecontainsallthe occu
pations where the deaths from cholera equalled one-
fiftiethof the number living,and all those in which
the deaths did not exceed one in two hundred and fifty
living.
In some of the occupationswhich show a high relative
mortality,the number of livingis too small to allow of
any reliablestatisticalresult,and the relativemortality
isprobably due to accidentalcircumstancesquiteuncon
nected with the occupation. In other cases,however,
the numbers are so considerableas to indicatesomething
more than accident. The 299 sailors,for instance,con
stitutedone twenty-fourthof the whole estimatednumber
in thatoccupation. The 7 ballast-heaversform just the
=====PAGE 129=====
122 PROPORTION OF DEATHS
same proportionof the whole in thatoccupation,and the
53 coalportersand coalheaversconstitutedone in 32 of
thoseso employed. Now allthosepersonslivedor were
employed on the river,where it is the habit to drink
water drawn by pailfulsfrom the side of the ship. The
67 hawkers are one in 22 of the whole number. These
persons are constantlymoving about,and are in the habit
of living in crowded lodging-houses,and consequently
must be extremely liableto contractany communicable
disease. Tanners nearly all live in Bermondsey and
Lambeth, supplied in 1849 with none but very impure
water, as was previouslyexplained. The weavers pro
bably sufferedthe high rateof mortalityfrom the crowd
ing of theirapartmentsin Spitalfields,and the uncleanness
of theirhabits.
The personswho sufferedlessfrom cholerathan any
other part of the male population,are footmen and men-
servants; and it is impossible to conceive a classless
exposed to the disease. They live in the best parts of
London, and go from home much lessthan theirmasters.
The low rateof mortalityamongst medical men and under
takers is worthy of notice. If cholerawere propagated
by effluviagiven off from the patient,or the dead body,
asused tobe the opinion of thosewho believedin itscom-
municability; or,ifitdepended on effluvialurking about
what are by otherscalledinfectedlocalities,in eithercase
medical men and undertakerswould be peculiarlyliable
to the disease; but, accordingto the principlesexplained
in thistreatise,thereisno reasonwhy thesecallingsshould
particularlyexpose persons to the malady.
There is one remarkable circumstanceconnected with
Dr. Guy's table. One master-brewer died of cholera,
being 1 in 160 of the trade; but no brewer's man or
brewer's servant is mentioned as having died of this
=====PAGE 130=====
IN DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONS. 123
TABLE XIV.
No. of
Deaths. Ratio.
Agents ..... 12 1 in 49
Bricklayersand builders 14 1 ,„ 39
Cowkeepers, dairymen, and milkmen 8 1 „ 20
Egg merchants .... 5 1 „ 6
Fishmongers .... 11 1 „ 20
Fruiterersand greengrocers 12 1 „ 28
Jobmasters, livery-stablekeepers . 5 1 „ 37
Oilmen ..... 13 1 „ 46
Paper-makers .... 2 1 „ 15
Poulterers ..... 3 1 „ 32
Sail-makers .... 2 1 „ 30
Turners ..... 2 1 „ 60
Ballast-heavers .... 7 1 „ 24
Coal-portersand coal-heavers 53 1 „ 32
Dustmen and scavengers 6 1 „ 39
Founders ..... 10 1 „ 12
Hawkers, etc. .... 67 1 „ 22
Lithographers .... 3 1 „ 48
Modellers ... 3 1 „ 41
Polishers ..... 4 1 „ 36
Sailors,including Greenwich pensioners 299 1 „ 24
Tanners ..... 22 1 „ 39
Weavers ..... 102 1 „ 36
Physicians,surgeons,& general practitioners 16 1 „ 265
Magistrates, barristers,conveyancers, and.
attorneys .... 13 1 „ 375
Merchants ..... 11 1 „ 348
Auctioneers .... 1 1 „ 266
Saddlers ..... 1 1 „ 250
Brass-finishers .... 3 1 „ 318
Coach-makers .... 16 1 „ 262
Cork-cutters .... 2 1 „ 279
Footmen and men-servants 25 1 1572
Jewellers,goldsmiths,and silversmiths 6 1 „ 583
Millwrights .... 2 1 „ 266
Tallow-chandlers .... 2 1 „ 430
Type-founders .... 1 1 „ 390
Undertakers .... 2 1 „ 325
Warehousemen .... 8 1 „ 472
Watchmakers .... 11 1 „ 364
Wheelwrights .... 8 1 „ 294
=====PAGE 131=====
124 ABSENCE OF DRAINAGE
malady,althoughthesemen must constituteaverynumerous
body in London. There must be a few thousands of them.
I have, indeed,met with the deaths of two or three of
these persons,in looking over the returnsof some of the
most fatalweeks in 1849 ; but the brewers' men seem to
have sufferedvery slightlyboth in that and the more
recent epidemics. The reason of this probably is,that
they never drink water,and are thereforeexempted from
imbibing the cholerapoisonin thatvehicle.
The great prevalence of cholera along the course of
rivershas been well known for a quarter of a century ;
and itmeets with a satisfactoryexplanationfrom the mode
of communication of the diseasewhich I am inculcating.
Rivers always receivethe refuseof those livingon the
banks, and they nearlyalways supply,at the same time,
the drinking water of the community so situated. It has
sometimes been objectedto the propagationof the disease
by the water of tivers,that the epidemic travelsas often
againstthe stream as with it. The reply to thisis,that
people travelboth againstthe stream and with it,and
thus convey the malady from villageto villageand from
town to town on the banks, whilst the water serves as a
medium to propagate the diseaseamongst thoselivingat
each spot,and thus prevents it from dying out through
not reachingfreshvictims.
The principlesI have laid down afforda satisfactory
explanationof the circumstances,thatabsenceof drainage
promotes the prevalenceof cholera,and that itflourishes
betteron a claysoilthan on primitiverocks,sandstone,
or gravel. Without drainage,the refuseof the population
permeatesthe ground, and gainsaccesstothe pump-wells.
Merthyr Tydvil,with 52,863 inhabitants,isentirelywith
out drainage,and the people derivetheirsupply of water
from pump-wells. This placehas sufferedseverelyfrom
=====PAGE 132=====
INCREASES CHOLERA. 125
cholera in every epidemic. In 1849 there were 1,682
deaths from this disease,heing 234 to each 10,000 inha
bitants,— a rateof mortalityas high as in Hull and certain
of the south districtsof London, where the morbid poison
of cholera was distributedby the steam-enginesof the
water companies. The primitiverocks, sandstone,and
gravel,generallycause the purificationof the water by
the separationor oxidationof organicmatters,whilstclay
does not exertthissalutaryinfluenceto the same extent.
Since the latterpart of 1848,when I firstarrivedat my
present conclusionsrespectingthe mode of communica
tion of cholera,I have become more and more convinced
thatmany other diseasesare propagated in the same way.
When the plague visitedthiscountry,itwas most fatal
in London, York, Winchester, and certainother towns
having a riverof freshwater passing through them. It
resembled choleraalsoin being twice as fatalin the dis
trictson the south of the Thames as in thoseon the north.
The followingpassage from Stow's " Survey", published
in 1633,shows the way in which Southwark was supplied
with water about the time ofthe greatvisitationsofplague :
" Southwark useth chieflythe water of the Thames, that
fallsintoa great pond at St.Mary Overies,thatdrivesa
mill calledSt.Saviour'sMill,the owner whereof is one
Mr. Gulston. The revenue thereofissupposed by some
to be worth 1,300/.a year."
Although some of the lower partsof the Citywere sup
pliedwith water from the Thames, at the latterpart of
the sixteenthand throughout the seventeenthcentury,yet
the greaterpart of London north of the Thames was sup
plied by fountainsand conduits,conveying spring water
from a distance. The followingquaint but poeticaccount
=====PAGE 133=====
126 MODE OF PROPAGATION
of the conduitsof London cannot failto be interesting:
" As nature,by veins and arteries,some great and some
small,placed up and down allparts of the body, minis-
terethblood to every partthereof;so was thatwholesome
water,which was necessary for the good of London, as
blood isforthe good and healthof thebody, conveyed by
pipes,wooden or metalline,as by veins,to every part of
thisfamous city.... They were lovely streams indeed
thatdid refreshthat noble city,one of which was always
at work pouring out itselfwhen the restlay still.Me-
thinkstheseseveralconduitsof London stoodlikesomany-
littlebut strong forts,to confront and give check to that
greatenemy, fire,asoccasionshouldbe. There, methinks,
the water was intrenchedand in-garrisoned.The several
pipes and vehiclesof water that were within these con
duits,allof them charged with water,tillby turning of
the cock they were discharged again,were as so many
soldierswithin these forts,with theirmusketry charged,
ready to keep and defend these places. And look how
enemies are wont to dealwith these castles,which they
take to be impregnable,and despairof every gettingby
them,— that is,by attempting to storm them by a close
siege: so went the fireto work with theselittlecastlesof
stone,which were not easy for it to burn down (witness
theirstandingtothisday) ; spoiledthem, or almost spoiled
them, ithath forthe present,by cuttingoffthosesupplies
of water which had vent to flow to them, melting those
leaden channels by which it had been conveyed, and
thereby,as itwere,starvingthosegarrisonswhich itcould
not takeby storm. As ifthe firehad been angry with the
poor old tankard-bearers,both men and women, forpro
pagating thatelement which was contraryto it,and carry
ing it upon their shoulders,as it were, in stateand
triumph,ithath even destroyedtheirtrade,and threatens
=====PAGE 134=====
OF THE PLAGUE. 127
to make them perish by firewho had wont to live by
water."*
Dr. Farr makes the followingremarks on the plague,in
his report on the choleraof 1848-9 : " It is endemic in
the Delta of the Nile,and periodicallydecimatesthe popu
lationof Cairo and Alexandria .... It grows gradually
lessfatalup the Nile,and islessfrequentand destructive
in Upper than in Lower Egypt, in the high lands and in
the desert,than on the low lands on the shores of the
Mediterranean." Speaking of Cairo,he says: " Through
the midst of it passes the Great Canal, into which the
sewers are discharged over carrion,excretion,and mud.
At the yearly overflowof the Nile,itswaters,fillingthis
canal,are distributedover the city,and drunk by its
wretched inhabitants."
The plague resemblescholerain being much promoted
by crowding and want of personalcleanliness.The natives
of Gurhwal, a provincein the north-westof BritishIndia,
in which the plague has been present forthe lastthirty
years,believethat it may be transmittedfrom one place
to anotherin articlesof diet,such as a jar of ghee.f
Yellow fever,which has been clearlyproved by Dr.
M'William and others to be a communicable disease,
resemblescholeraand the plague in flourishingbest,as a
general rule,on low alluvialsoil,and also in spreading
greatlywhere thereisa want of personalcleanliness.This
diseasehas more than once appeared in shipssailingup
the riverPlate,beforethey have had any communication
with the shore. The most probable cause of thiscircum
stanceis,thatthe freshwater of thisriver,taken up from
alongsidethe ship,containedthe evacuationsof patients
with yellow feverin La Plata or othertowns.
* Bolle'sAccount of the Burning of London in 1666.
+ OfficialReports on the Provinceof Kumaon, by J.H. Batten,Esq.,C.E.
Agra, 1851.
=====PAGE 135=====
128 MODE OF PROPAGATION
It was long ago observed, that dysentery was appa
rently propagated by the drinking of water containing
excrementitiousmatters* The frequentappearanceofthis
diseasein Millbank prison,when the Thames water was
used,isa confirmationof this; and Dr. Bryson has lately
relateda number of instanceswhere both dysentery and
feverseemed to be occasionedby the water of the Yang-
tse-Kiang,the Canton river,and other riversof China.f
What very much confirms thisview of the case,is,that
nearly allthe patientswere afflictedwith great numbers
of intestinalworms (lumbrici); foritcannot be supposed
thatthe worms could proceed from malaria,miasmata, or
any of the causeswhich arefrequentlybelievedto occasion
dysenteryand fever. The eggs of the lumbriciwere no
doubt contained in great numbers in the water of the
denselypopulated Chinese rivers.
There are many factswhich indicatethat one at least
of the continued fevers— the typhoid feverwith ulcera
tion of the small intestines— is also propagated in the
same way as cholera. Dr. Jenner called my attention
some time ago to an instanceoccurring at the villageof
North Boston,Erie County, N.Y., in which typhoid fever
was probably communicated to a number of familiesby
the contaminationof thewater of a well which they used.X
The epidemic which prevailed so extensivelyat Croydon
two years ago was of thischaracter,as was verifiedby a
Committee of the EpidemiologicalSociety,of which Drs.
Sankey, Jenner, and A. P. Stewart were members. Mr.
Carpenter, of Croydon, has latelyshown very ably that
this epidemic was connected with the pollutionof the
* Dr. Cheyne on Dysentery,Dublin HospitalReports,vol.iii.
+ StatisticalReports on the Health of the Navy. Part II. 1853.
X See ClinicalReports of Continued Fever, by Austin Flint,M.D. :
Buffalo,1852, p. 380. Also Med. Times and Gazette,March 12,1853,
p. 261.
=====PAGE 136=====
OF YELLOW FEVER. 129
pump-wells of the town, owing to the disturbanceof the
ground, and of many old cesspoolsduring the drainage
operationsof the Local Board of Health.* The Board
had supplied the town with good water from a deep well
in the chalk,but the population had a prejudiceagainst
it and persistedin resortingto the water of the shallow
pump-wells. In the autumn of lastyear diarrhoeawas
very prevalent in Croydon, and Mr. Carpenter found
that this also was caused by the impure water of the
pump-wells. Nine-tenthsof the people of Croydon were
drinking the new water suppliedby the Board of Health,
but, out of thirty-twopatientswith diarrhoeawho came
under the notice of Mr. Carpenter, twenty-fivewere
drinking well-waterentirely,fivedrank water from both
sources,and the other two could not decidedlysay that
they had not drank well-water.
Intermittentfeversareso fixedto particularplacesthat
they have deservedly obtained the name of endemics.
They spread occasionally,however, much beyond their
ordinary localities,and become epidemic. Intermittent
fevers are undoubtedly often connected with a marshy
stateof the soil; for drainingthe land frequentlycauses
theirdisappearance. They sometimes,however, existas
endemics, where there is no marshy land or stagnant
water within scores of miles. Towards the end of the
seventeenthcentury,intermittentfeverswere, forthe first
time, attributedby Lancisi to noxious effluviaarising
from marshes. These supposed effluvia,or marsh mias
mata, as they were afterwardscalled,were thought to
arise from decomposing vegetable and animal matter;
but, as intermittentfevershave prevailedin many places
where there was no decomposing vegetable or animal
matter,thisopinion has been given up in a great mea-
* AssociationJournal,October C, 1854.
K
=====PAGE 137=====
130 CAUSE OF INTERMITTENT FEVERS.
sure; stillthe beliefin miasmata or malariaof some kind,
as a cause of intermittents,isvery general. It must be
acknowledged, however, that there is no directproof of
the existenceof malaria or miasmata, much lessof their
nature.
That preventiveof ague, drainingthe land,must affect
the water of a districtquite as much as itaffectsthe air,
and there is directevidence to prove that intermittent
fever has, at all events in some cases,been caused by
drinking the water of marshes. In the " General Report
of the Poor Law Commissioners on the SanitaryCondi
tion of Great Britain,"*Mr. Wm. Blower, surgeon, of
Bedford, statesthattyphus and ague, which had long in
festedthe villageof Wootton, near Bedford, had been
much diminished by digging a few wells,and obtaining
good water. He also statesthat,in the neighbouring
parishof Houghton, almost the only familywhich escaped
ague, at one time,was that of a respectablefarmer who
used well water, whilst allthe other familieshad only
ditchwater.
M. Boudinf relatesa very marked instancein which
intermittent,and apparently also remittent,fever were
caused by drinking marsh water. It isas follows:—
" In July 1834, 800 soldiers,allin good health,em
barked on the same day in three transportsat Bona, in
Algeria,and arrived together at Marseilles; they were
exposed to the same atmospheric influences,and were,
with one essentialdifference,suppliedwith the same food,
and subjectedto the same discipline.On board one of
the vesselswere 120 soldiers: of these,13 died on the
passage,from a destructivefever,and 98 more were taken
to the militaryhospitalof the lazarettoat Marseilles,pre
senting allthe pathologicalcharactersproper to marshy
* 8vo.,1842,p. 00. t Essai de Geographie Medicale,p. 52.
=====PAGE 138=====
CAUSE OF INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 131
localities.On seeingthe physiognomy of thesepatients,
altogetherso unusual forMarseilles,one would have said
thatthe Gulf of Mexico, the Delta of the Ganges, and the
marshes of Senegal and of Holland, had supplied passen
gers to thisship. In short,by the sideof a simpleinter
mittent,there was a perniciousfever. On an inquiry
being instituted,it was ascertainedthat on board the
affectedship the water supplied for the soldiers,owing
to the haste of the embarkation,had been taken from a
marshy place near Bona ; whilst the crew, not one of
whom was attacked,were suppliedwith wholesome water.
It further appeared that the nine soldierswho had
escaped had purchased water of the crew, and had conse
quently not drunk the marsh water. Not a single
soldieror sailorof the other two transports,who were
suppliedwith pure water,suffered."
Mr. Grainger, who quotes the above circumstancein
his Appendix to the Report on Cholera,alsosays:*" Dr.
Evans, of Bedford, relatedto me an equallywell-marked
instance. A few years ago,he was stayingat Versailles,
with his lady,when they both became affectedwith the
ague, and, on inquiry,the followingfactswere disclosed.
The town of Versaillesis suppliedwith water fordomes
tic purposes from the Seine,at Marli. At the time in
question,a largetank,supplying one particularquarter,
was damaged, and the mayor, without consulting the
medical authorities,provided a supply of water,consist
ing of the surface-drainageof the surrounding country,
which isof a marshy character. The regularinhabitants
would not use this polluted water ; but Dr. and Mrs.
Evans, who were at an hotel,drank of itunwittingly,and
itwas alsoused by a regiment of cavalry. The result
was, that thosewho drank the water sufferedfrom inter-
* Tageu.
k2
=====PAGE 139=====
132 CAUSE OF INTERMITTENT FEVERS.
mittent fever of so severe a type,that seven or eightof
the soldiers,fine young men, died on one day, Sept. 1,
1845. On a carefulinvestigationitwas ascertainedthat
thoseonly of the troopswho had drunk the marsh water
were attacked; allthe others,though breathingthe same
atmosphere,having escaped,as did alsothe townspeople."
In allthe instancesI have just quoted, the cause_of
ague, whatever itmay be, was swallowed with the water,
not inhaledwith the air; and on questioningtwo patients,
illwith this complaint,in St. George's Hospital,after
harvestingin Kent, they toldme thatthey had oftenbeen
obliged to drink water from the ditches. The diseaseof
the liverand spleen,to which persons are subjectafter
attacksof intermittentfever,also confirmsthe view that
itsmaterialcause enters the system by the alimentary
canal,and not by the lungs ; and it is of importance to
remark, thatHippocrates observed,thatdrinking stagnat
ing waters caused hard swellingsof the spleen.*
Whether the unknown cause of ague has been pro
duced in the system of a previous patient,likethe pus of
small-poxand the eggs of tape-worm, or whether it has
been produced externally,there is,at present,no suffi
cient evidence to show. In the case firstsupposed,the
diseasewould be a communicable one, in the second it
would not.
There is one circumstance which seems to indicate
that the specificcause of intermittentfeversundergoes a
development or multiplicationwithin the system of the
patient,— itis,that a period of dormancy, or incubation,
has been observed,in many cases,between the visitto
the unhealthylocalityand the illnesswhich followed; for,
as I have alreadyremarked, every poisonousor injurious
substance causes symptoms as soon as it has been ab
sorbed in sufficientquantity.
* De Aere,Aquis,et Locis.
=====PAGE 140=====
CAUSE OF INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 133
The communication of ague from person to person has
not been observed,and supposing thisdiseaseto be com
municable,itmay be so only indirectly,for the materies
morli eliminatedfrom one patientmay requireto undergo
a processof development or procreationout of the body
beforeitentersanother patient,likecertainflukesinfest
ing some of the lower animals,and procreatingby alter
nate generations.
The measures which are required forthe preventionof
cholera,and alldiseaseswhich are communicated in the
same way as cholera,are of a very simple kind. They
may be divided into those which may be carriedout in
the presence of an epidemic,and thosewhich, as they re
quire time,should be taken beforehand.
The measures which should be adopted during the pre
sence of choleramay be enumerated as follows:—
1st. The strictestcleanlinessshould be observed by
those about the sick. There should be a hand-basin,
water,and towel,in every room where thereisa cholera
patient,and care should be taken thatthey are frequently
used by the nurse and other attendants,more particularly
beforetouching any food.
2nd. The soiledbed linenand body linenof thepatient
should be immersed inwater as soon as they are removed,
untilsuch time as they can be washed, lestthe evacua
tionsshould become dry, and be wafted about as a fine
dust. Articlesof bedding and clothingwhich cannot be
washed, should be exposed for some time to a tempera
ture of 212° or upwards.
3rd. Care should be taken thatthe water employed for
drinking and preparing food (whether it come from a
pump-well, or be conveyed in pipes)is not contaminated
with the contentsof cesspools,house-drains,or sewers;
=====PAGE 141=====
134 MEASURES REQUIRED
or,in the event thatwater freefrom suspicioncannot be
obtained,it should be well boiled,and, if possible,also
filtered.
Works are in progress for supplying a great part of
London with water from the Thames, obtained,likethatof
theLambeth Company, above Teddington Lock. Although
thisis not the best possiblesource forsupplying a large
town, it isa great improvement on the practiceof many
of the water companies ; and the water,owing to filtra
tion,and especiallyto itsdetentionin largereservoirs,will
probablybe quitesalubrious: at alleventsitwillbe much
saferthan thatofthe shallowpump-wells of London, which
are fed from very polluted sources. It isvery desirable
thatthe handles of nearly allthe street-pumpsof London
and otherlargetowns should be fastenedup,and thewater
used only for such purposes as watering the streets.A
proper supply of water forthe shipping in the Thames is
much wanted. Water acquiresa flattasteby being boiled;
but ifitisfilteredafteritbecomes cold,itgetsre-aerated,
and the flator vapid tasteisentirelyremoved.
4th. When cholera prevailsvery much in the neigh
bourhood, allthe provisionswhich are brought into the
house should be wellwashed with cleanwater,and exposed
to a temperature of 212° Fahr.; or at leastthey should
undergo one of these processes,and be purifiedeitherby
water or by fire.By being carefulto wash the hands, and
taking due precautionswith regard to food, I consider
thata person may spend his time amongst cholerapatients
without exposing himselfto any danger.
5th. When a caseof choleraor othercommunicable dis
easeappears among personslivingin a crowded room, the
healthy should be removed to another apartment,where
itispracticable,leavingonly thosewho are usefulto wait
on the sick.
=====PAGE 142=====
FOB THE PREVENTION OF CHOLERA. 135
6th. As itwould be impossibleto clean out coal-pits,
and establishpriviesand lavatoriesin them, or even to
provide the means of eating a meal with anything like
common decency, the time of working should be divided
intoperiodsof four hours insteadof eight,so thatthe pit
men might go home totheirmeals,and be prevented from
taking food intothe mines.
7th. The communicability of cholera ought not to be
disguisedfrom the people,under the idea thatthe know
ledge of it would cause a panic, or occasionthe sick
to be deserted.
Britishpeople would not deserttheirfriendsor relatives
in illness,though they should incurdanger by attendingto
them ;but the truthis,thattolook on choleraasa " catch
ing" disease,which one may avoid by a few simple precau
tions,isa much lessdiscouragingdoctrinethan thatwhich
supposesitto depend on some mysteriousstateofthe atmo
sphere in which we are allof us immersed and obligedto
breathe.
The measures which can be taken beforehandtoprovide
against cholera and other epidemic diseases,which are
communicated in a similarway, are—
8th. To effectgood and perfectdrainage.
9th. To providean ample supplyofwaterquitefreefrom
contaminationwith the contentsof sewers,cesspools,and
house-drains,ortherefuseofpeoplewho navigatetherivers.
10th. To provide model lodging-housesforthe vagrant
class,and sufficienthouse room for the poor generally.
The greatbenefitofthe model lodging-housesarisesfrom
the circumstancethat the apartments forcooking,eating,
and sleeping,are distinct,and that allthe proper offices
which cleanlinessand decency requireare provided. The
very poor who choose to availthemselvesof theseinstitu
tions,suffera rateof mortalityas low as thatof the most
=====PAGE 143=====
136 MEASUKES REQUIRED
opulent classes. The public wash-houses,which enable
poor persons to wash the soiledlinen of the sickor the
healthy,without doing it in the midst of the platesand
dishesand provisionsof the family,are well calculatedto
prevent the spread of disease.
11th. To inculcatehabitsofpersonaland domesticclean
linessamong the people everywhere.
12th. Some attentionshould undoubtedly be directed
to persons,and especiallyships,arrivingfrom infected
places,in order to segregatethe sick from the healthy.
In the instanceof cholera,the supervisionwould generally
not requireto be of long duration.
In the autumn of 1853, certainGerman emigrants,on
theirway toAmerica, who had crossedthe sea from Ham
burgh and Rotterdam, where cholera was prevailing,to
the port of Hull, and had gone thence,by rail,to Liver
pool,were seizedwith cholera(some of them fatally)in
the lattertown ; and itismost likelytothe well-regulated
Emigrant's Home, in which thesecasesoccurred,thatthe
town of Liverpoolowed itsfreedom from the epidemic at
thattime. And a littlemedical supervision,and the de
tentionof some of the emigrantsfora shorttime in Liver
pool,beforetheirembarcation,would probably have pre
vented the greatmortalitywhich occurred in some of the
emigrant shipsduring theirpassageto America.
The measures which are intended to prevent disease
should be founded on a correctknowledge of itscauses.
For want of this knowledge, the effortswhich have been
made to oppose cholerahave often had a contraryeffect.
In 1849, for instance,the sewers of London were fre
quently flushedwith water,— a measure which was calcu
latedto increasethe diseasein two ways : first,by driving
the cholera evacuationsinto the river before there was
time forthe poisontobe rendered inertby decomposition;
and second,by making increasedcallson the variouscom
=====PAGE 144=====
FOR THE PREVENTION OF CHOLERA. 137
/
panies for water to flushthe sewers with,— so that the
water which they sent to theircustomers remained fora
shortertime in the reservoirsbefore being distributed.
Itshould be remarked, also,thatthe contentsofthe sewers
were driven intothe Thames by the flushing,atlow water,
and remained flowingup the stream forfour or fivehours
afterwards.Flushing the sewers was not repeatedduring
the recent epidemic, but increased quantitiesof water
were distributedby some of the Companies, and at more
frequentintervals,causingthe water-buttsto overflowfor
hours togetherintothe drains,and producing nearlythe
same effectas flushingthe sewers; in additionto which,
the water in the butts of the Southwark and Vauxhall
Company's customers was prevented from settling,as it
might have done iflessfrequentlydisturbed.
I feel confident,however, that by attending to the
above-mentioned precautions,which I consider to be
based on a correctknowledge of the cause of cholera,
thisdiseasemay be rendered extremely rare,if indeed it
may not be altogetherbanished from civilizedcountries.
And the diminution of mortalityought not to stopwith
cholera. The deaths registeredunder the name of typhus
consistchieflyof the typhoid fevermentioned above. Its
victimsare composed chieflyof persons of adultage,who
are taken away from theirfamiliesand connections. In
1847 upwards of 20,000 deathswere registeredin Eng
land from typhus,and in 1848 upwards of 30,000 deaths.
It isprobable thatseven times as many deathshave taken
placefrom typhus as from cholera,sincethe latterdisease
firstvisitedEngland in 1831 ; and there isgreatreason
to hope thatthismortalitymay in futurebe prevented by
proper precautions,resultingfrom a correctknowledge of
the mode of communication of the malady.
=====PAGE 145=====
APPENDIX,
Containingthe number of deaths from choleraregisteredin the
fourweeks ending 5th August, 1854, togetherwith the supply
of water in the houses in which the fatalattackstook place,
in allthe sub-districtsto which the water supplyof eitherthe
Southwark and Vauxhall or the Lambeth Company extends.
(See Table vu, page 84.) The registersof deaths are copied
from the Weekly Returns of the RegistrarGeneral.
St. Saviour, Southwabk. Christchurch.
At 34, CharlotteStreet,on 29th July,a stock-maker,
aged 29, "Asiatic cholera18 hours" . . Lambeth.
At 45, Gravel Lane, on 1stAugust, the widow of a
farmer,aged 48, "cholera 12 hours". Southwark 8f Vauxhall.
At 1,Alpha Place,on 1stAugust, a barrister'sclerk,
aged 57, "cholera 24 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
St. Saviour, Southwabk:. St. Saciour.
At 1,Park Street,on 25th July,the wife of a labourer,
aged 35, " Asiaticcholera14| hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 40,Bankside,on 25th July,the son of a locksmith,
aged 5 years,"cholera 12 hours" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At same house, on 26th July,the daughter of a lock
smith,aged 9 yrs.," cholera12 hours".Southwark and Vauxhall.
At same house, on 28th July,the daughter of a lock
smith,aged 13yrs.,"choleral2hours".Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 97, Bridge Road, on 28th July,a hatter,aged 36,
" Asiaticcholera24 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 49, Great Guildford Street,on 29th July,a coal-
porter,aged 44, "cholera 12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 146=====
APPENDIX. 13!)
At 20, Zoar Street,on 31st July,a female,formerlya
domestic servant,aged 79, "diarrhoea 2 days, cholera
12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 22, America Street,on Aug. 1,thewifeofan engine-
driver,aged 38, "cholera 12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 5, PleasantPlace,August 1,the daughter of a coal-
porter,aged 5 years," Asiaticcholera13 hours".
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 10, CastleStreet,on 1stAugust, the son of an en
gineer,aged 7 years," cholera12 hours".
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 36, New Park Street,on 1stAugust, the son of an
artist,aged 2 years,"Asiatic cholera10$ hours".
Thames waterfrom the tank of a saw-mill.
At 54$, Great Guildford St.,on 2nd Aug., a labourer
aged 51, " Asiaticcholera47 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house, same day, the wife of a labourer,
aged 48, " Asiaticcholera12^ hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Emerson Place,on 3rd August, the wife of an
engineer,aged 30, "cholera2 days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 29, Norfolk St.,on 2d Aug., the son of a labourer,
aged 3 years,"Asiatic cholera12$ hours".
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 68,Great GuildfordSt.,on 3rd Aug., thewidow of a
labourer,aged40, " cholera19 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 10, CastleStreet,on 3rd August, the daughter of a
labourer,aged 4 years," cholera12 hours".
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At White Hart Inn Yard, on 3rd August, the wife of a
porter,aged 49, "cholera 14 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 22, America Street,on 3rd August, an engine-
driver,aged 35, " cholera9 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 15, Essex Street,on 4th August, a packer,aged 65,
" diarrhoea4 days,cholera11 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 17, Southwark Square, on 3rd August, the wife
of an engineer,aged 31, "diarrhoea 1 day, cholera 3
days" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 147=====
140 APPENDIX.
At 31,York Place,5th Aug., the daughterofa labourer,
aged 5 yrs."Asiaticcholera,11^ hours". Southwark Sf VauxhalL
At 50,Great GuildfordStreet,on 4th August, a baker's
shopwoman, aged 21, "Asiaticcholera" Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 10, RussellPlace, on 5th August, the widow of a
steam-boat stoker,aged 38, " diarrhoea4 weeks, Asiatic
cholera20 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 14,Keppel St.,31stJuly,the daughter of a cooper,
aged 4 years,"Asiaticcholera12 hours".Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 3, Bank End, on 2nd August, a widow of a coach-
trimmer, aged 73, " Asiaticcholera14 hours".
Thames waterfrom tank at Messrs. Barclay SfPerkins.
Si. Or,AVE, Sotjthwakk. St. Olace.
At St.Thomas's Hospital (from Grey Eagle Street,
Spitalfields),on 27th July,a labourer,aged 32, " rheu
matism, cholera 20 hours". This patient,named John
Moull,was admittedwith rheumatism on 25thJuly.Water
supply of hospital.
Southwark and Vauxhall and pump-wells on thepremises.
At 5,Marble Court,July 28,the son of a basket-maker,
aged 4 years,"malignant cholera12 hours".
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house, July 30, a stonemason'sdaughter,
aged 2 yrs.,"choleraicdiarrhoea2 days". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 3,Gimber's Rents, July 31, a labourer'sdaughter,
13 months, "Asiatic cholera7 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Guy's Hospital,July 30, a dressmaker, aged 19,
" cholera";admitted with cholera from 2, Port Place,
Walworth Common . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Gimber's Rents, Aug. 1, a labourer'sdaughter,
3 years,"Asiaticcholera48 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
On board the " Prince Cobourg", Cotton'sWharf, on
August 2nd, a seaman, aged 38, "Asiatic cholera 14
hours" .... Most likelyThames water.
At 5, Marble Court,August 1, the daughter of a bas
ket maker, aged 1 year and 4 months, "cholera,conges
tionof brain" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 148=====
APPENDIX. 141
At 6, Darley'3Buildings,August 2, the daughter of a
labourer,2 yrs.,"Asiatic cholera14 hrs." Southwk. Sf Vauxhall.
At Guy's Hospital,on August 1st,a sailor,aged 16,
" cholera"; admitted with cholera from a ship in the
Thames .... Most likelyThames water.
At Guy's Hospital,on 2nd August, a bookbinder,aged
30, "cholera";was taken illin the trainon hisway from
Portsmouth . . -. Water supplynot ascertained.
At Guy's Hospital,on 3rd August, the daughter of a
block-turner,aged 11 yrs.,"cholera";admittedwith cho
lerafrom 7, Mint Street,Southwark. Southwark and Vauxhall.
At St.Thomas's Hospital,supposed from Red Cross
Street,Southwark, on 31st July,a charwoman, aged 50,
" cholera" . . . Water supplynot ascertained.
At St.Thomas's Hospital,from (28)Cole Street,Dover
Road, on 2nd August, a cab-driver,aged 40, " cholera";
admitted with cholera . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At St. Thomas's Hospital,from (1 Star Place) Star
Corner, Bermondsey, on 3rd August, a baker, aged 27,
" cholera";admitted with cholera. Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 10, TattleCourt,on 4th August, a labourer,aged
46, "Asiatic cholera12 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 11, Green Bank, on 4th August, the daughter of a
pavior,aged 3 years,"Asiatic cholera18 hours."
Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 24, Mellor Street,on 3rd August, a butcher,aged
73, " cholera18 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 194, Tooley Street,Aug. 5th,the son of a railway
porter,aged 16 months, "cholera". Southwark and Vauxhall.
St. Olave, Sottthwark. St. John, Horsleydown.
At 8, CharlesStreet,July 20,a carman, aged 42, "diar
rhoea3 days,Asiaticcholera22 hours". Southwark 8f Vauxhall.
At 19,Bermondsey St.,July 26, a labourer'sdaughter,
aged 5 yrs.,"choleraAsiatica4| hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 4, Abdy Street,on 29th July,a corn-turner,aged
60, "Asiatic cholera,with premonitory diarrhoea,18
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 149=====
142 APPENDIX.
At 12, Bermondsey Street,July 29, a railway porter,
aged 34, "malignant cholera12 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 5,Gibbon's Rents,July 29, wifeof a railwayporter,
aged 39, "malignant cholera16 hours". Southwark §•Vauxhall.
At 18, Parish Street,July 29, a carpenter'slabourer,
agedl9, " diarrhoea4 days,cholera3days" Southwark fyVauxhall.
At the Union Workhouse, on 30th July, a labourer,
aged 40, "Asiaticcholera24 hours"; admitted with cho
lerafrom 4,Bethel Place,Vine Yard". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Union Workhouse, on 31st July,an apprentice
to the sea,aged 16, ".Asiaticcholera36 hours"; admitted
with cholerafrom on board ship. Most likelyThames water.
At 5, Bethel Place,July 30, the wife of a corn-turner,
aged 35, "Asiaticcholera4 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house,Aug. 1, daughter of a corn-turner,
aged 1 year,"Asiatic cholera3 days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8,Gibbon's Rents, Aug. 1, the wife of a carpenter,
aged 32, "Asiatic cholera12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 6, Gordon Terrace,on 1stAugust, the daughter of
a coal-porter,aged 2 years and 7 months, "Asiaticcho
lera4 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Union Workhouse, on 1stAugust, a slater,aged
56, "Asiatic cholera24 hours"; admitted with cholera
from 4, Magdalen Court,Tooley-street.Southwark 8f Vauxhall.
At the Union Workhouse, on 3rd August, the wife of
a labourer,aged 30, " Asiaticcholera4 days"; admitted
with cholerafrom 4,BethelPL, Vine Yd. Southwark fyVauxhall.
At 22,Magdalen Street,Aug. 1,a singlewoman, aged
53, " cholera24 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3,Freeman's Lane, on 2nd August, a labourer,aged
25, "premonitory diarrhoea,with sickness,24 hours;
Asiaticcholera9 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Charles Street,July 30, the widow of a hatter,
aged 62, "cholera 11 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4,Charles Street,Aug. 4,a female,aged 45, " diar
rhoea7 days,English cholera12 hours". Southwark 8fVauxhall.
=====PAGE 150=====
APPENDIX. 143
Bermondsey. St. James.
On board the ship "Ouse", offBcrmondsey, July 9, a
mariner,aged 50, "choleral6 hours". Most likelyThames water.
At 5, Gibson's Cottages,on 18th July,the son of a
chair-marker,aged 5 years," choleraicdiarrhoea2 days,
collapse1 day" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, Bermondsey Wall, on 23rd July,the daughter
of a bookseller,aged 4 years," cholera9 hours".
Thames water,by dippinga pail in thericer.
At 4,Bermondsey Wall, July 24, a sawyer'sdaughter,
aged 3 yrs.,"cholera 20 hours". Thames water,by dippingapail.
At 9, PleasantRow, July 25th,the wife of a labourer,
aged 55, " chronicdiseaseof liver2 years,choleraicdiar
rhoea 16 hours" . . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 10, Marine Street,on 24th July,a mate, mariner,
aged 34, "Asiatic cholera101 hours,aftercholeraicdiar
rhoea 16J hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 10,Marine Street,on 24th July,a mariner,aged 27,
"Asiatic cholera 13 hours, afterpremonitory diarrhoea
2£ hours" . . . Southivarkand Vauxhall.
At 4, Bermondsey Wall, July 27, a sawyer, aged 62,
"cholera 32 hours" . Thames water,by dippinga pail.
At 6, PerseveranceCourt,on 28th July,the wife of a
hawker, aged 30, " cholera 24 hours, no premonitory
symptoms" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8, Foxlow Street,on 29th July, the daughter of a
labourer,aged 18 years,"diarrhoea some days,cholera
13 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 14, Gedling Terrace,Aug. 2, a carman's daughter,
aged 2 years,"cholera maligna 4 days". Southwark $•Vauxhall.
At 22, George Row, August 3, a stonemason,aged 30,
" choleramaligna 10 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Bermondsey Wall, on 3rd August, the wife of a
publican,aged 34, "Asiaticcholera19 hours".
Thames water,by dippinga pail.
At 6, PleasantRow, on 3rd August, the daughter of a
=====PAGE 151=====
144 APPENDIX.
currier deceased, aged 5 years, "Asiatic cholera 7
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Parker'sTerrace,on 3rd August, the son of an
oil-cooper,aged 1 year,"diarrhoea 10 days, cholera 2
days" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 36, Ernest Street,on 4th August, the wife of an
engineer, aged 37, " premonitory diarrhoea24 hours,
cholera41 hours . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1,Bermondsey Wall, on 4th August, the son of a
mariner, aged 2 years, "diarrhoea 10 days, cholera 2
days" . . . Thames water,by dippinga pail.
At 5,George Row, Aug. 2,the son ofa lighterman,aged
3 yrs.,"choleraicdiarrhoea3| days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Water Lane, on 29th July,a domestic servant,aged
23, " cholera10J hours" . Southtvarkand Vauxhall.
At 16, Marine Street,on 30th July,the daughter of a
labourer,aged 9 yrs.,"cholera 11 hrs." Southwark §• Vauxhall.
At 8,Printer'sPlace,July 30, the widow of a publican,
aged 70, " Asiaticcholera15 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 4,Green Walk, on Aug. 1,thewifeofa hoop-bender,
aged 47, "Asiatic cholera7 days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 5, John Place, on 1stAugust, a leather-dresser,
aged 54, " Asiaticcholera22 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 16, Marine Street,on 2nd August, the wife of a
labourer,aged 51, " cholera30 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Metcalf Court,on 1stAugust, the son of a la
bourer,aged 2 years and 6 months, "measles 14 days,
diarrhoea1 week, cholera2 days"
Beg Southwark and Vauxhall waterfrom neighbours.
At 3, Frederick Place,on 2nd August, a cooper,aged
40 years," Asiaticcholera" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 5, Somerset Place, on 2nd August, the daughter
of a labourer,aged 3 years," diarrhoea18 hours,cholera
12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Mill Street,on 3rd August, the wife of a master
tin-plateworker, aged 27 years, " diarrhoea4 hours,
cholera16 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 152=====
APPENDIX. 145
At 14, Gedlin Terrace,31stJuly,the son of a carman,
aged4yrs.,"malignant cholera13 hours". SouthivarkSfVauxhall.
Bebmondsey. St.Mary Magdalen.
At 13, Abbey StreetSouth,July 25, a trotter-cleaner,
aged 18 years," cholera16 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Long Walk, on 26th July,the son of a labourer,
aged2yrs.,"diarrhoeacholeraic15hours".Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 2, Providence Place, on 28th July,the wife of a
leather-dresser,aged 56, " diarrhoea4 hours, cholera
20 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Providence Place,on 28th July,the wife of a
currier,aged 58, " diarrhoea3 hours, cholera 18 hours"
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 13,Willow St.,on 2nd Aug., the daughterofa ware
houseman, aged4yrs.,"choleramorbus". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 14,Fendall St.,Aug. 4,the son of a leather-dresser,
aged 5yrs.,"Asiatic cholera10 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 2, Finimore's Court, on 3rd August, a labourer,
aged 74, " Asiaticcholera" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 54, LittleGeorge St.,Aug. 4, son of a labourer,
aged 2 yrs.," choleramaligna, 40 hrs".Southwark SfVauxhall.
At the Workhouse, on July 29,the son of a pen-cutter,
aged 9 yrs.," Asiaticcholera19 hours. Died 7 hours after
admission." From 12,Minto Street. Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 25,Maltby Street,July 28,the widow of a solicitor's
clerk,aged 65, "Asiaticcholera". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, on 31st July, a shoemaker, aged
46, " Asiaticcholera11 hours afteradmission in stateof
collapse". From 99, Russell Street. Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 19, Grange Walk, on 31stJuly,a blacksmith,aged
21, " cholera15 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 36, Abbey Street,on 30th July,the daughter of a
labourer,aged 2 years, " cholera3 days, congestion of
brain,convulsions12 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 13, Abbey Street,on 29th July,the daughter of a
labourer,aged 2 years, " cholera 56 hours, diarrhoea2
days" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 153=====
146 APPENDIX.
At 5, RussellStreet,on 1stAugust, a porter,aged 64,
" Asiaticcholera" . . Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At the Workhouse, on 2nd August, a sailor,aged 32,
" Asiaticcholera,21 hours afteradmission in a state of
collapse". From ship " Malvern". Most likelyThames water.
At 3,Long Walk, on 30th July,the son of a carpenter,
aged 2 years," cholera 2 days, secondary fever2 days"
Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 49, Page's Walk, on 1st August, the wife of a
deal-porter,aged 31, "cholera maligna 10 hours, diar
rhoea4 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At the Workhouse, on 2nd August, the daughter of a
labourer,aged 7 years," Asiaticcholera(30 hours) after
admission in a stateof collapse".From 7,Chapel Place,
Long Lane . . . Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 41, Brunswick Court, on 3rd August, a servant,
aged 28, " cholera48 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhatt.
Bekmondsey. Leather Market.
At 4, Princes Place, Crosby Row, on 19th July, the
daughter of a journeyman cordwainer, aged 4 years,
"English cholera,12 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 17, King's Place, Crosby Row, on 28th July,the
wife of a labourer,aged 29 years," Asiatic cholera24
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 25, Smith'sBuildings,30th July,the daughter of a
labourer,aged 3yrs.,"cholera 19hours" Southwark 8fVauxhatt.
At 15, Brook Street,on 31st July,the son of a jour
neyman tanner,aged 20 months, "cholera 15 hours".
Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 27, Nelson Street,July 31, the wife of a labourer,
aged 35, "Asiatic cholera18 hours". Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 5, Richardson Street,on 30th July,the son of a
journeyman leather-dresser,aged 18 years," diarrhoea7
days, Asiaticcholera15 hours". Southwark and Vauxhatt.
At 2, Staple Street,on 2nd August, the daughter of
a journeyman cordwainer, aged 6 years, "cholera 11
hours" . . . .. Southwark and Vauxhatt.
=====PAGE 154=====
APPENDIX. 147
At 185, Long Lane, on 3rd August, the wife of a
journeyman tanner,aged 26 years,"cholera biliosa12
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1,ElizabethPlace,Baalzephon Street,on 2nd Aug.,
the son of a journeyman cordwainer,aged 1 year,"diar
rhoea 1 day,Asiaticcholera1 day" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Alfred Place,Nelson Street,on 2nd August, the
daughter of a cordwainer,aged 17 years," Asiaticcholera
12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 101,Snow's Fields,Aug. 3,a journeyman carpenter,
aged 63, "Asiatic cholera12 hours" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, StapleStreet,on 3rd August, the son of a jour
neymen cordwainer, aged 4 years, " cholera 48 hours,
premonitory diarrhoea3 days" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, LittleCharlotte Row, Nelson Street,on 1st
August, the son of a carman, aged 1£ years, " cholera
12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house, on the same day, the son of a car
man, aged 3 yrs.,"cholera 12 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 8, Minto Street,on 2nd August, the son of a jour
neyman tanner,aged 3 yrs.," diarrhoea3 days, cholera
24 hours,secondaryfever2 days" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 23, Baalzephon Street,on 4th August, the son of
a journeyman wire-weaver, aged l£ years, "diarrhoea
2 days,Asiaticcholera36 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 53, Long Lane, on 3rd August, a stay-maker,aged
52, " diarrhoea,Asiaticcholera". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, Grange Road, on 4th August, the son of a jour
neyman tanner,aged 4 years,"Asiatic cholera11 hours"
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1, Wood's Place, Grange Road, on 4th August,
a labourer,aged 24, " cholera 12 hours, premonitory
diarrhoea3 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 16,Alfred Place,Nelson Street,on 3rd August, the
daughter of a journeyman bricklayer,aged 1 year, " den
tition,diarrhoea,cholera,convulsions". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 15, Wyld's Rents, on 15th August, the wife of a
L2
=====PAGE 155=====
148 APPENDIX.
journeyman baker,aged 27, "cholera Asiatica17 hours,
collapse,premonitorydiarrhoea8 hours".SouthicarkSfVauxhall.
At 7,AlfredStreet,on 5th Aug., a journeyman tanner,
aged 63, " cholera,collapse62 hours,premonitorydiarrhoea
12 hours,consecutivefever12 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 7,Brook Street,on 3rd Aug., a journeyman tanner,
aged 40, " cholera,collapse12 hours, premonitory diar
rhoea 7 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
St. George, Southwark. Kent Road.
At 7, Layton's Buildings,July 29, a tailor,aged 20,
"cholera 17 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Dobb's Cross,July 30, the son of a shop-keeper,
aged lOyrs.,"choleraAsiatic24 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 81, Ann Street,July 29, the son of a labourer,
aged 12 years," cholera8 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 28,Wickham PL, Aug. 2,son of a brush-mkr.,aged
2jyrs.,"choleraicdiarrhoea24 hours." Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 2, Russell Place,Aug. 2, the widow of a labourer,
aged 55, " Asiaticcholera21 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 9, Tennis Place, 3rd of August, the widow of a
sawyer, aged 67 years,"diarrhoea 36 hours, cholera14
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 13,George St.,Aug. 2,the wife of a shoemkr.,aged
35, "diarrhoea,cholera,convulsions" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, Noel Street,Aug. 4,the widow of a porter,aged
65 years, " Asiaticcholera39 hours" . Lambeth.
St. Geoege, Southwark. Borough Road.
At the Workhouse, from Savage'slodging-house,Mint
Street,29th of July, a female servant,aged 28 years,
" cholera" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 6, Ebden Court, Pearl Row, 27th of July, the
daughter of a butcher,aged 3 years,"Asiaticcholera10
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 24, Gun St.,July 23,the wifeofa bookbinder,aged
36, " Asiaticcholera24 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 5, Nelson PL, July 28, the son of a butcher,aged
5 weeks, " choleraicdiarrhoea3 days". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 156=====
APPKNDIX. 149
At the Workhouse, July 29,a hawker, aged 44, "cho
lera(verybad)"; an inmate . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Union Street,July 27, the widow of a master
shoemaker, aged 73, " diarrhoea7 days, choleraAsiatica
8 hours" ..... Lambeth.
At 10, Lombard Street,July 29, the daughter of a
labourer,aged 2 years," diarrhoea4 hours,cholerama
ligna,24 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house, August 1, the daughter of a la
bourer,aged 4 years,sisterof above, " choleramaligna
12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1, Burton's Buildings,Friar Street,August 2, the
daughter of a coppersmith, aged 9 years, " cholera 3
days, fever2 days" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, from Hooper's lodging-house,9,
Angel Place, July 30, a labourer,aged 36, " cholera
Asiatica" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, brought in from 29, Wilmot's
Buildings, August 1, a labourer,aged 29, " cholera
Asiaticabout 12 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 35, Green Street,31st of July,the wife of a horse-
slaughterman,aged 64, "hepatitis14 days, gall stones,
Asiaticacholera24 hours . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, Aug. 3, a widow, aged 70, " cho
leraAsiaticaabout 12 hours"; inmate. Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, from King's lodging-house,Mint
Street,3rd August, a hawker, aged 45 years," cholera
Asiatica" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, Aug. 3, a coppersmith,aged 52,
" cholera Asiatica 2 days", from 15, John St.,Suffolk
Street . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 30, Hill St.,Aug. 1, the daughter of an engineer,
aged 2 years,"cholera 12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 83,Southwark Bridge Rd., Aug. 1,solicitor'sclerk,
aged 21, "cholera 19 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 23, George St.,Aug. 3,the wife of a labourer,aged
19, "cholera maligna 15 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 157=====
150 APPENDIX.
At the Workhouse, brought in by the policefrom the
station-houseat Stones End, Aug. 4, a servant,aged 50,
" choleraAsiatica" . . . Not ascertained.
At 1, LittleSuffolk Street,Aug. 4, the daughter of a
hammerman, aged 3 years, " remittentfever 7 days,
cholera20 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 5, Bean Street,Aug. 5, a female servant,aged 28,
" diarrhoea24 hours,cholera30 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
St. George, Sotjthwabk. London Road.
At 60, Tower Street,July 16, the wife of a butcher,
aged 26, " Asiaticcholera13 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 12, East PL, West Sq.,July 29, an ostler,aged 42,
"diarrhoea6 days,choleramaligna 14 hours". Lambeth.
At 32,Duke Street,Aug. 1,the son of a smith,aged 5
years," Asiaticcholera36 hours" . . Lambeth.
At 11, London Road, July 31st,a servant,aged 17,
"Asiatic cholera24 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Spiller'sCt, Webber Row, Aug. 1, the daughter
of a charwoman, aged 18 months, "chronic diarrhoea2
months, cholera24 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2,Short St.,Tower St.,Aug. 2,a coal-porter,aged
32, " cholera3 days" . . . Lambeth.
At 8, Princes Court, Princes Street,on the 3rd of
August, the son of a butcher,aged 5J years,"cholera 8
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 105, BlackfriarsRoad, Aug. 1,a compositor,aged
32, " diarrhoea,cholera14 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Duke Street,Tower Street,August 4th,-the son
of a civilengineer,(deceased)," consumption 9 months,
cholera8 hours" .... Lambeth.
Newington. Trinity.
At 58, Brandon Street,July 26, a house-painter,aged
24, "Asiatic cholera40 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3,Winter Terrace,July 31, the wife of an engineer,
aged 27, " cholera26 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 16, Swan St.,Aug. 1,the son of a carpenter,aged
8 years," choleramaligna 14 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 158=====
APPENDIX. 151
At 6,St.Andrew's Kd., Aug. 1,a waiter,aged 35,"diar-
rhcea3 days,choleramaligna 12 hours". Southwark 8fVauxhall.
At 175, Kent St.,Aug. 2, the son of a clothier,aged
7 3'ears,"malignant cholera23 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 66,Brunswick St.,Aug. 3,the wife of an engineer,
aged 35, "cholera 1 week, exhaustion". Southivark8f Vauxhall.
At 64, TrinitySquare, August 2, a milliner,aged 32,
" choleramaligna 30 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Etham Place,Aug. 3, a paperhanger,aged 42,
" choleraAsiatica6J hours" . Southivarkand Vauxhall.
At 54, Great Dover Rd., Aug. 3, the widow of a wine
merchant, aged 64, " English cholera23 hours,collapse
12 hours" . . . Southivarkand Vauxhall.
At 182, Kent Street,August 4th,a labourer,aged 23
years," diarrhoea17 hours,choleraAsiatica8 hours,col
lapse" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 99, Uxbridge Street,Aug. 4,the son of a jeweller,
aged 3 years," diarrhoea27 hours,Asiatic cholera 24
hours,collapse" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same hou3e, on the same day, the daughter of
a jeweller,aged 1 year," Asiaticcholera 28 hours,col
lapse" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 11,Swan Street,August 5, the wife of a collecting
clerk,aged 42, " chronicbronchitis5 years,English cho
lera3 days, collapse18 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 58,Brandon St.,Aug. 4,thewidow ofahouse-painter,
aged 26, "Asiatic cholera4 days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
Newington. St. Peter,Walworth.
At 7, Berkeley Terrace,the 25th of July,the wife of
a mercantileclerk,aged 35 years,"Asiatic cholera 14
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8, Townley Place,on the 29th of July,the son of
a journeyman shoemaker, aged 6J years,"cholera 19
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8, Richmond Street,July 28 th,the daughter of a
labourer,aged 5 years,"choleraicdiarrhoea3 days,cere
braleffusion2 days" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 159=====
152 APPENDIX.
At 6, John Street,East Street,July 29th, the widow
of a carman, aged 83, " choleraAnglica 27 hours,old
age" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 29, Pilgrim Street,on the 1st of August, the
daughter of an ostler,aged 18 months, "Asiatic cholera
8 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8, Townley Place,August 1st,the daughter of a
journeyman shoemaker, aged 8 years," choleraAsiatica
about 16 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 29, Beckford Row, Aug. 1,the wifeofagreengrocer,
aged 46 years,"cholera Asiatica 16 hours,collapse11
hours" . • . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 15, Smith Street,Aug. 3,the wife of a baker,aged
•20, "Asiatic cholera8 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1, John Street,Walworth Common, August 2, the
wife of a glue-maker, aged 54, " diarrhoea2 days, cho
lera22 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2,Milk Street,on the 2nd of August, the daughter
of a journeyman shoemaker, aged 6 years," Asiaticcho
lera30 hours" . . Southioarkand Vauxhall.
At 7,Blucher St.,Aug. 2,a gentleman,aged 36,"cho
leraAsiatica20 hours,collapse". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 28, Bronti Place,August 2nd, the wife of a letter
carrier,aged 46, " cholera Asiatica 28 hours, collapse
24 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Totham Place,Boundary Lane, August 2nd, the
widow of a journeyman bricklayer,aged 63, " Asiatic
cholera18 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2, Sarah Terrace,Hill Street,August 2nd, the son
of a clerk in the Post Office,aged 5£ years," epidemic
cholera7 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 99,Hill Street,on the 3rd of August, the daughter
of a traveller,aged 1 year and 10 months, "malignant
cholera9 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 18, West Street,Aug. 4, a needlewoman, aged 22,
"cholera maligna 12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 160=====
APPENDIX. 153
At 26, Penton How, Aug. 1,an auctioneer,aged 39,
"diarrhoea52 hours,cholera9 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 21, Park Road, August oth, an iron-planer,aged
43, " cholera4 days" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 19,James Place,Hill Street,Aug. 5, a gentleman,
aged 89, " choleraicdiarrhoea6 days". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At the same house, same day, the wife of the above,
aged 50, " Asiaticcholera12 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
Newington. St. Mary.
At 4, Parsonage Row, July 30, a gentlewoman, aged
40, "Asiatic cholera16 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 31,Weymouth Street,July 28, the wife of a chair-
maker, aged 34, "Asiaticcholera12hrs." Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 8,Church St.,July 30,thedaughter ofa chairmaker,
aged 17 months, " cholera10 hours".Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8,Peacock Sq.,July 31,thewidow ofa seaman, aged
59, " cholera12 hours,typhus 4 days". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 19, Waterloo PI.,Aug. 2, the son of a shoemaker,
aged 8 years," cholera12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
Lambeth. Waterloo (FirstPart).
At CurtisHatch, on 29th July,a Baptistminister,aged
52, "diarrhoea 3 days,Asiaticcholera and collapse18
hours". The informant statedthatdeceased,whom he
had long known, calledat his house about seven in the
morning before his death ; he was then very ill." He
lived at 7, Lower Anne Street,Waterloo Road, where
the supply was . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, Hammond's Place,on 30th July,the wife of a
labourer,aged 72, " diarrhoea24 hours,malignant cho
lera12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, Queen Street,July 31st,latea brewer'sservant,
aged 76, "cholera 1 day" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 41, Brad Street,August 1st,the wife of a printer,
aged 51, "cholera 26 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3,Hammond's Place,on August 5th,the daughter
of a smith,aged 6 years,"diarrhoeaand malignant cho
lera12 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 161=====
154 APPENDIX.
Lambeth. Waterloo (Second Part).
At 23, Howley Place,July 29, the wife of a carman,
aged 58, "cholera about 11 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 18, Vine Terrace,on 31stJuly,a butcher,aged 19,
"Asiatic cholera18 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 36,IsabellaSt.,July 30, a hammerman ata factor)',
aged 39, "Asiatic cholera68 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 12,HarrietStreet,on 2nd August, a miller,aged 17,
" choleraAsiatica17 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 9, GriffinStreet,Aug. 4, the wife of a bricklayer,
aged 75, "Asiaticcholera48 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
Lambeth. Lambeth Church (FirstPart).
At 52, Upper Fore Street,on July 20th, the wife of a
bricklayer'slabourer,aged 23, "cholera 12 hours".
Thames water,by dippinga pail.
At 6,Newport Street,on 30th July,the wifeof a porter,
aged 37, "cholera 8 hours" . . . Lambeth.
At 32, South St.,July 31, a timber-merchant'swidow,
aged 67, "Asiatic cholera15 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, Mount Place,Kennington Road, on 31st July,a
wine-merchant, aged 35, " Asiatic cholera 16 hours";
addressnot found . . . Not ascertained.
At 7, Vauxhall Row, Aug. 2, the son of a bricklayer,
aged 4 years," cholera16 hours" Southwark and Vauxhall.
Lambeth. Lambeth Church (Second Part).
At 26,New St.,July 28,the wifeof a labourer,aged 29,
"diarrhoea3 days,cholera12 hours" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 29, Park Street,July 29, an eating-house keeper,
aged 39, "cholera 9 J hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 79,4Wickham Street,August 1, the daughter of an
engineer,aged 1 year,"choleraicdiarrhoea,exhaustion".Lambeth.
At 24, Caroline Street,on 31st July,the son of a la
bourer,aged 14 years,"cholera 11 hours" . Lambtth.
At the Workhouse, on 2nd August, a washerwoman,
aged 23, "Asiatic cholera";admitted in a dying state;
addressnot known . . . Not ascertained.
At 60, Park Street,on 2nd August, the wife of a lath-
=====PAGE 162=====
APPENDIX. 155
render, aged 31, "cholera 2jdays, consecutivefever 5
days" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4,High St.,Vauxhall,Aug. 3,a musician,aged 35,
" malignant choleraafter2 days diarrhoea,6 days secon
dary fever,with cerebralcongestion."Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Vauxhall Gardens, on 2nd August, a widow, aged
56, "cholera 16 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 33, East Street,on 3rd Aug., a carpenter,aged 40,
" diarrhoea7 days,cholera3 days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 19,Bennett'sBuildings,on 4th August, the daugh
ter of a carpenter,aged 2 years,"cholera Asiatica12
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
Lambeth. Kenninglon (FirstPart).
At 6, William Street,Clapham Road, on 26th July,
the son of a carpenter,aged 2 years,"Asiatic cholera
12 hours" ..... Lambeth.
At 3, Dudley Place,Clapham Road, on 24th July,the
wife of a bookseller,aged 42, " sero-spasmodiccholera
15 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, Henry Street,Dorset Street,Clapham Road, on
28th July,the daughter of a butcher,aged 4 years,"cho
lerasero-spasmodica15 hours" . . . Pump-well.
At 23, Cambridge Terrace, Clapham Road, on 30th
July,the daughter of a commercial traveller,aged 20,
" choleraicdiarrhoea24 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3,Belmont Place,Wandsworth Road, on 29th July,
the daughter of a railway-guard,aged 8 years," cholera
10| hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 9,Regency Place,White Hart Street,on 31st July,
the widow of a brass-worker,aged 44, " cholera 30
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1,Bowling Green Mews, on 28th July,the daugh
ter of a chair-maker, aged 8 years, " cholera 13
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 61,Prince'sSquare,July 31,widow ofa linen-agent,
aged 42, "Asiatic cholera15 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, Southville,Wandsworth Road, on 2nd August,
=====PAGE 163=====
156 APPENDIX.
a paper-hanger,aged 26, "Asiatic cholera,premonitory
diarrhoea24 hours,collapse24 hours". Southwark 8fVauxhall.
At 5,South Lambeth, Aug. 4,the wifeofan equestrian,
aged 39, " choleraAsiatica36 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 19, Mansion House Street,Kennington, on 3rd
August, formerlya dress-maker,aged 36, "cholera Asia-
tica6hours,premonitorydiarrhoea2days" Southwark SfVauxhall.
Lambeth. Kennington (2nd Part).
At 14, Robertson Place, Stockwell, on 3rd August,
the wife of a carpenter,aged 35, " Asiatic cholera 5
hours" .... Southivarkand Vauxhall.
At 2, James Street,on 5th August, the son of a brick
layer,aged 7 yrs.," cholera7 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1, Somerset Place,Aug. 3, a gentleman, aged 56,
" spasmodic cholera12 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
Lambeth. Brixton.
At 2, Sussex Road, July 14th,the widow of a coach
man, aged 53, " diarrhoea6 days, English cholera 3
days" ...... Lambeth.
Lambeth. Norwood. — No death from cholera.
Wandswobth. Clapham.
At 5, Cook's Buildings,Park Road, on 29th July,the
daughter of a sawyer, aged 3 years,"cholera 12 hours,
diarrhoea3 days" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, Howard Street,Wandsworth Road, July 30, a
labourer,aged 74, "cholera 52 hours". Southwark 8fVauxhall.
Atl, Waterloo Retreat, Bromell's Road, July 29, a
gardener,aged 46, "cholera 12 hours" . Pump-well.
At High Street,July 31, a domestic servant,aged 28,
" cholera52 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 13, Prospect Place, Wandsworth Road, on 2nd
August, a Government clerk,aged 50, " malignant cho
lera4 days,diarrhoea48 hours,collapse".
Southwark and Vauxhall,and pump -well.
Wandsworth. Battersea.
At 6, Church Road, July 19,the wifeof a house-agent,
aged 48, "Asiatic cholera48 hours." Southwark and Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 164=====
APPENDIX. 157
At Nine Elms, on 26th July,the widow of a cooper,
aged 79, " cholera18 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
,At Albert Villas,on 27th July,the son of a clerk in
the Customs, aged 2 years, "premonitory diarrhoeaa
month, Asiatic cholera 16 hours, consecutivefever 30
hours,convulsions2 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Lave*ler Hill,on 25th July,the wife of a gentle
man, aged 46, " premonitory diarrhoea20 hours, cholera
16 hours" ..... Pump-well.
At 25, LittleEuropa Place,on 30th July, the wife
of a gardener, aged 50 years, " Asiatic cholera 33
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At York Road, on 31st July,the daughter of a gar
dener,aged 12 years,"premonitory diarrhoeaneglected8
hours, "Asiatic cholera,11 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 18, York Street,Battersea Fields, on 29th July,
the son of a boiler-maker,aged 1 year and 7 months,
**cholera10 hours" . Thames water suppliedby a cart.
At Canterbury Place,York Road, on 2nd August, the
wife of a bricklayer,aged 35, " diarrhoeaunattended 2
days, Asiaticcholera12 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 33, LittleEuropa Place,on 2nd August, a labourer,
aged 48, " premonitory diarrhoea 4 hours, cholera 16
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Falcon Lane, on 3rd August, the daughter of a
chemist deceased, aged 14 years, "premonitory diar
rhoea 4 hours,cholera24 hours".
Water from a ditchintowhich the cesspoolsempty themselces.
At Lavender Road, on 3rd August, a clockmaker,aged
47, "Asiatic cholera" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At York Road, August 4, the daughter of a gardener,
aged 21, " choleramaligna 11 hours" Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 30, iEgis Terrace,BatterseaFields,on 2nd August,
the son of a horse-dealer,aged 12 years,"cholera 15
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
Wandswoeth. Wandsworth.
At Armoury Yard, on 3rd August, the daughter of a
=====PAGE 165=====
158 APPENDIX.
labourer, aged 4 years, " measles 6 days, cholera 6
hours" . . . Thames waterfetchedinpails.
At Apothecaries'Row, 5th Aug., the son of a sawyer,
aged 10, "cholera 12 hours". Thames ivaterand pump-well.
Wakdswoeih, Putney.
At Cooper's Arms Lane, on 5th August, a bricklayer's
labourer,aged 38, " premonitory diarrhoea9 hours,Cho
lera15 hours" ..... Pump-well.
Wandswohih. Streatham. No death from cholera.
Cambeeweli. Dulwich. No death from cholera.
Cambebweil. Camherwell.
At 1, Rose Cottages,Waterloo Street,on 23rd July,
the daughter of a proctor'sclerk,aged 8 years," cholera
Asiatica15 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house,on same day,the sisterofthe above,
aged 1year," choleraAsiatica9 hours". Southivark$• Vauxhall.
At Garden Cottage,HarrisStreet,on 22nd July,a car
man, aged 49, " cholera16 hours". Southicarkand Vauxhall.
At 17, James Street,on 26th February, the daughter
of a singlewoman, aged 14 days, " natural exhaustion
from choleraicdiarrhoea".(Inquest.)Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Ann's Place, George Street,on 2nd August, the
daughter of a coachman, aged 4 years, " cholera 8
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 9, Martha Street,on 3rd August, a fish-hawker,
aged 62, " cholera24 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8, Cork Street,on 4th August, the wife of a la
bourer,aged 33, "cholera 32 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the Workhouse, on 29th July, a nurse, aged 60
years, " cholera 24 hours". From 5, Martin's Road,
Peckham .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 57, James Street,on 5th August, the wife of a
waiter,aged 33, cholera17 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Camherwell House, on 1st August, a male, aged
69 years," exhaustionfrom mania 3 months, cholera24
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Camherwell House, on 1stAugust, a mariner,aged
=====PAGE 166=====
APPENDIX. 159
53 years, "general paralysis11 months, cholera 17
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 13, Waterloo Street,on 30th July,the son of a la
bourer,aged 4 yrs.,"cholera7hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 3, CarolinePlace,Wyndham Road, on 31st July,
the daughter of a brewer'sservant,aged 1 year," cholera
9 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Camberwcll House, Lunatic Asylum, on 28th
July, a male, aged 32, "epilepsy 7 years, cholera 8
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Camberwell House, Lunatic Asylum, on 29th July,
a labourer,aged 43, " general paralysis2 years,cholera
.18 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At Camberwell House, on 29th July, a servant,aged
47, " cholera26 hours" . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 30, Clarendon Street,on 30th July,a grocer,aged
56, " Asiaticcholera9 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1,Absolom Place,South Street,on 2nd August, a
girl,aged 21 months, "diarrhoea 48 hours, cholera21
hours" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 17, Cork Street,on 1st August, the son of a
painter,aged 1 year, " diarrhoea2 days, cholera 1
day" . , . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
Camberwell. Peckham.
At 5, Martin'sRoad, July 27th,the wifeof a labourer,
aged 40, "cholera maligna 16 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At the same house, on 29th July,the daughter of a la
bourer,aged 2 yrs.," cholera28 hours". Southwark SfVauxhall.
At 33, Rye Lane, on 30th July, a domestic servant,
aged 23, "cholera 5£ hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 2,Nun Green, Nunhead, on August 4,the daughter
of a potter's labourer, aged 4 years, "cholera 48
hours" .... Southwark 8fVauxhall.
Camberwell. St. George.
At BinfieldHouse, Windmill Lane, July 28, the son
of a labourer,aged 4 years,"cholera 16 hours".
Southivarkand Vauxhall.
=====PAGE 167=====
160 APPENDIX.
At 2, Waterloo Place,Coburg Road, July 31, a girl,
aged 3 months, " cholera20 hours" . . Lambeth.
At 1, Oakley Ter.,Old Kent Rd., July 29, thewife of
an oilman,aged 30, " Asiaticcholera". Southwark &f Vauxhall.
At the same house,Aug. 1,the son of an oilman,aged
8 weeks, " choleramaligna 3 days". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 6, Brown's Terrace,Wyndham Road, Aug. 3, the
son of a labourer,aged 3 months, "infantilecholera6
days" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 27, Thomas Street,Wyndham Road, Aug. 4, the
widow of a labourer,aged 68, " diarrhoea6 days,cholera
4 days" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, Rosemary Terrace,Southampton Street,Aug. 5,
the son of a labourer,aged 7 years," Asiaticcholera15
hours" . . . Southioarkand Vauxhall.
At 5, Chatham Place,Windmill Lane, August 3rd, a
plumber, aged 60, " diarrhoea2 days, cholera2 days".
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, GloucesterPL, Old Kent Rd., Aug. 4,a carman,
aged 19, " Asiaticcholera15 hours" . . Lambeth.
Rotherhithe. Rotherhithe.
At 2, Albert Place,Union Road, July 8, the wife of a
coifee-shopkeeper,aged 32, " cholera30 hours"
Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, Spread Eagle Court, July 22nd, the wife of a
labourer,aged 25, " cholera12 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At 19, Spread Eagle Court,July 24th, the daughter
of a labourer,aged 1 year and 9 months, " cholera 20
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 4, John's Place,July 25th, a blacksmith,aged 41,
" cholera10 hours". Water pumped from beneaththe Thames
Tunnel, by theEngine of the Thames Tunnel Company.
At 1, John's Place, July 27th,the wife of a biscuit
baker, aged 45, " cholera26 hours" . Same as aboce.
At 5, John's Place,July 25, the son of a baker, aged
4 years," cholera24 hours" . . Same as above.
=====PAGE 168=====
APPENDIX. 161
At 89, Adam Street,on the 28th July,4the widow of a
blacksmith,aged 36 years," diarrhoea24 hours,cholera
16 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 5, King St.,July 29th,the wife of a labourer,aged
40, " cholera2J days" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At CharlottePlace,Charlotte Row, July 29, the son
of a barge-builder,aged 3 years," cholera3 days". Tidalditch.
At 5,Slater'sAlley,July 29,a labourer,aged 33, "cho
lera3J days". Thames Tunnel water,fetchedfrom John'sPlace.
At 18, Upper Queen Street,Aug. 2, the daughter of a
labourer,aged 7 years," cholera2 days, typhoid fever7
days" .... Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 1,Thetford Place,August 1,the son of a labourer,
aged 7 years,"cholera 7 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
■On board ship in the Surrey Canal Dock, August 2, a
mariner,aged 65, "Asiatic cholera18 hours" .
Most likelyThames Water.
On board the brig " Boreas", of Sunderland, in the
riverThames, Aug. 2,the wife of a master mariner,aged
38, " cholera13£ hours" . Most likelyThames Water.
At 20, Spread Eagle Court,Aug. 1, a labourer,aged
28, " cholera16 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 7, Midway PL, Aug. 1, the daughter of a domestic
servant,aged 3 years," measles 14 days, Asiaticcholera
18 hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 12,St.Helena PL, Aug. 1, the wife of a carpenter,
aged 31, "morbus cordis 5 years, Asiatic cholera 24
hours" . . . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 18,StanleyTerrace,August 1,the son of a mercan
tileclerk,aged 2 years," premonitory diarrhoea3 hours,
Asiaticcholera5 hours" . Southwark and Vauxhall.
At York St.,near Swan Lane, Aug. 1,the son of a car
penter,aged 3 yrs.," cholera12 hours" Southwark 8fVauxhall.
At York Street,near Swan Lane, on 3rd August, a car
penter,aged 38, "cholera 8 hours". Southwark and Vauxhall.
At 8, Norfolk Place,August 4, the son of a labourer,
aged 5 years," cholera8 hours". Southwark §• Vauxhall.
M
=====PAGE 169=====
162 APPENDIX.
At 16,CharlotteRow, Aug. 3,the wife of a waterman,
aged 57, " cholera20 hours" . . . Tidalditch.
At 3, Plough Bridge,Aug. 3,the daughter of a ware
houseman, aged 12, "Asiatic cholera 12 hours". Surrey Canal.
At 53, Clarence Street,Aug. 4,the wife of a labourer,
aged 48, " cholera14 hours". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
At York St.,near Swan Lane, Aug. 5,the son of a car
penter,aged 1 year," cholera3 days". Southwark 8f Vauxhall.
At 9,New St.,Neptune St.,Aug. 5,the wifeofa brush-
maker, aged 57, " cholera3 days". Southwark Sf Vauxhall.
Lewisham. Sydenham. — No death from cholera.
THE END.
T. RICHARDS, 37 GREAT QUEEN STREET.